# A Systematic Review on the Evaluation and Characteristics of Computer-Aided Diagnosis Systems

## Abstract

**Introduction:** One of the challenges in developing Computer-Aided Diagnosis (CAD) systems is their accurate and comprehensive assessment. This paper presents the conduction and results of a systematic review (SR) that aims to verify the state of the art regarding the assessment of CAD systems. This survey provides a general analysis of the current status of the design, development and assessment of such systems and includes discussions on the most used metrics and approaches that could be utilized to obtain more objective evaluation methods.

**Methods:** The SR was conducted using the scientific databases, ACM Digital Library, IEEE Xplore Digital Library, ScienceDirect and Web of Science. Inclusion and exclusion criteria were defined and applied to each retrieved work to select those of interest. From 156 studies retrieved, 100 studies were included.

**Results:** There is a number of abnormalities that have been used for the development of CAD systems. Images from computed tomographies and mammographies are the most encountered types of medical images. Additionally, a number of studies used public databases for CAD evaluations. The main evaluation metrics and methods applied to CAD systems include sensitivity, accuracy, specificity and receiver operating characteristic (ROC) analyses. In the assessed CAD systems that used the segmentation method, 30.0% applied the overlap measure.

**Discussion:** There remain several topics to explore for the assessment of CAD schemes. While some evaluation metrics are traditionally used, they require a prior knowledge of case characteristics to test CAD systems. We were not able to identify articles that use software testing to evaluate CAD systems. Thus, we realize that there is a gap between CAD assessments and traditional practices of software engineering. However, the scope of this research is limited to scientific and academic works and excludes commercial interests. Finally, we discuss potential research studies within this scope to create a more objective and efficient evaluation of CAD systems.

**Keywords:** CAD evaluation, Classification, Computer-aided diagnosis, Detection, Medical image, Segmentation.

## Introduction

Computer-Aided Diagnosis (CAD) schemes are computer systems aiming at providing second opinions to physicians to aid in diagnoses [1]. These systems compute outputs based on information from diverse sources, primarily from medical images captured using various methods. According to van Ginneken et al. [2], CAD has become the most active field of research in medical imaging. Further, Doi [3] showed that CAD systems provide consistent interpretations of medical images to improve the precision of a diagnosis.

The assessment of CAD schemes is one of the major difficulties encountered in their development. Because results can vary depending on the used set of images, it is not an easy task to determine the effectiveness of a particular technique. To ascertain the feasibility of a technique, tests should be conducted with a set of images that preferably have varied acquisition characteristics. Additionally, this image set should meet the requirements of the purpose of the technique, i.e., they should contain the structures sought by the computer system. This entails a collaborative effort with hospitals and clinics to perform detailed and thorough analyses to obtain appropriate medical images and their respective reports. The cataloging of these images based on their characteristics allows for their fast and accurate retrieval.

This paper presents a systematic review (SR) aiming to verify the state of the art regarding the assessment of CAD systems. Additionally, we analyzed data from the included studies, such as computational techniques employed in the development of CAD schemes, abnormalities investigated and modalities of the most explored medical imaging. Thus, this survey made possible a general analysis of the current scope regarding the design, development and assessment of such systems.

Overviews on the development and trends of CAD schemes have been presented by Doi [1] and Shiraishi et al. [4]. Doi [1] carried out a historical review regarding the development of CAD schemes. Examples of works that explored different modalities of medical imaging were also presented to aid in diagnosing several abnormalities, such as lung nodules, vertebral fractures and intracranial aneurysms. Doi also discussed the potential of such schemes for applications in clinical routines. Shiraishi et al. [4] presented a review on the application of analyses using Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) curves to assess CAD systems. The review included studies published in Radiology Journal between 1997 and 2006. The review also analyzed the participation of human observers in the assessment processes and identified the most explored medical imaging modalities.

In our study, the presented unique systematic review is based on a set of criteria characterizing the differences and relevance between results, as listed below:

*   A comprehensive selection of scientific databases as reference sources, allowing access to diverse publications in the field (these databases were selected after carrying out an exploratory study that defined relevant research sources);
*   A definition and disclosure of an SR protocol that was strictly followed during the review (this protocol permitted a reproducible review and audited the used criteria); and
*   An analysis of results taking into account each automated task to aid individual diagnoses (i.e., segmentation, detection and classification of abnormalities and regions of interest).

In addition to this introductory section, the paper is organized as follows. The "Methods" section presents concepts about the SR, the protocol used and the process of conducting the review. The "Results and discussion" section presents and discusses the results.

## Methods

The systematic review is a rigorous methodology of bibliographic research that aims to identify primary and secondary studies related to a particular research topic. It permits the assessment and interpretation of all relevant research on a particular issue or topic of interest [5].

According to Biolchini et al. [6] and Kitchenham [5], an SR is carried out in three well-defined phases: planning, conduction and analysis of results. In the planning phase, a protocol is defined specifying research questions and the methodology to be employed in the conduction of the review. Furthermore, this protocol defines purposes for the SR, reference sources, criteria for the inclusion or exclusion of primary studies, keywords and other topics of interest. In the conduction phase, the bibliographic research is carried out. In this phase, studies are selected according to the defined inclusion and exclusion criteria. Finally, in the analysis of results, the data extraction is performed, and the results are compared.

A major difference between an SR and the non-systematic review of the literature is the fact that the establishment of a protocol allows the SR to be reproduced and audited. Other researchers can follow the same protocol and assess the methods used for the case at issue [6]. The following subsections describe each of the previously cited phases applied in the SR carried out in the present work.

### Planning

First, research questions are defined:

*   What are the methodologies currently applied for the assessment of CAD systems based on medical imaging?
*   What are the modalities of medical imaging, abnormalities and computational techniques involved in the development of CAD systems?
*   What are the advantages and limitations presented by the assessment methodologies employed in CAD systems?

An exploratory analysis on CAD was carried out over several scientific databases. This preliminary survey aided in selecting reference sources and the definition of the keywords used in the SR. Based on our experiences with journals, we consulted databases that traditionally published articles on the subject. The following databases were selected:

*   ACM Digital Library (ACM)
*   IEEE Xplore Digital Library (IEEE)
*   ScienceDirect (SD)
*   Web of Science (WS)

From the defined keywords of the protocol, queries for papers on journals or proceedings of scientific conferences were carried out in the selected databases. Only recent studies (published since 2006) were considered for assessing the state of the art of CAD.

The selection of acknowledged reference sources in the field made it possible to retrieve a significant number of studies on CAD. Moreover, defining adequate criteria for the inclusion and exclusion of works focused on the sources to the relevant subject matter. A composition of terms was used to initially narrow the scope of the reference sources. These terms had to be present in the title, abstract or keywords to qualify a source (these indices were searchable by means of advanced search tools available for each database). The defined terms were as follows:

(evaluation OR testing OR assessment) AND ("computer-aided diagnosis system" OR "computer-aided diagnosis scheme" OR "computer-assisted diagnosis system" OR "computer-assisted diagnosis scheme" OR "diagnosis support system" OR "diagnostic support system")

**TABLE 1** presents the compositions of terms translated for each of the search engines of the consulted databases.

To select only relevant papers for the subject of study, we defined the inclusion and exclusion criteria. We included only studies that met at least one of the inclusion criteria and none of the exclusion criteria.

Sources that met the defined inclusion criteria had to:

(a) present or discuss concepts, criteria and methodologies to assess CAD systems whose outputs are presented as images or use images processed in a way to enable diagnoses;
(b) apply a specific methodology in the assessment of some CAD system with the characteristics mentioned in the first inclusion criterion; or
(c) present concepts or historical reviews on CAD.

In turn, excluded sources that met all the defined exclusion criteria had to:

(d) be similar, in content and results, with other studies by the same authors retrievable from any of the consulted databases;
(e) have a publication year outside the specified deadline (i.e., earlier than 2006); and
(f) not be fully available in the consulted databases or in any other database accessible on the Internet.

**TABLE 1. Composition of terms used in searches.**

| Source | Search tool and options | Refinement by year | Terms compositions |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| ACM | Advanced search Custom search string | Yes | (evaluation or assessment or testing or Keywords:evaluation or Keywords:assessment or Keywords:testing) and ("computer-aided diagnosis system" or "computer-aided diagnosis scheme" or "computer-assisted diagnosis system" or "computer-assisted diagnosis scheme" or "diagnosis support system" or "diagnostic support system" or Keywords:"computer-aided diagnosis scheme" or Keywords:"computer-assisted diagnosis system" or Keywords:"computer-assisted diagnosis scheme" or Keywords:"diagnosis support system" or Keywords:"diagnostic support system") |
| IEEE | Command search Search: metadata only | Yes | ("Document Title":evaluation OR "Abstract":evaluation OR "Author Keywords":evaluation OR "Document Title":assessment OR "Abstract":assessment OR "Author Keywords":assessment OR "Document Title":testing OR "Abstract":testing OR "Author Keywords":testing ) AND ("Document Title":"computer-assisted diagnosis scheme" OR "Abstract":"computer-assisted diagnosis scheme" OR "Author Keywords":"computer-assisted diagnosis scheme" OR "Document Title":"computer-assisted diagnosis system" OR "Author Keywords":"computer-assisted diagnosis system" OR "Document Title":"computer-aided diagnosis system" OR "Author Keywords":"computer-aided diagnosis scheme" OR "Abstract":"computer-aided diagnosis scheme" OR "Author Keywords":"computer-aided diagnosis scheme" OR "Author Keywords":"computer-aided diagnosis scheme" OR "Document Title":"computer-aided diagnosis scheme" OR "Document Title":"computer-aided diagnosis system" OR "Author Keywords":"computer-aided diagnosis scheme" OR "Author Keywords":"computer-aided diagnosis scheme" OR "Document Title":"computer-aided diagnosis scheme" OR "Author Keywords":"computer-aided diagnosis system" OR "Document Title":"diagnostic support system" OR "Abstract":"diagnostic support system" OR "Author Keywords":"diagnostic support system") |
| SD | Advanced search | Yes | pub-date > 2005 and TITLE-ABSTR-KEY(evaluation OR testing OR assessment) and TITLE-ABSTR-KEY("computer-aided diagnosis system" OR "computer-aided diagnosis scheme" OR "computer-assisted diagnosis scheme" OR "computer-assisted diagnosis scheme" OR "diagnostic support system") |
| WS | Document type = (ARTICLE OR MEETING) | Yes | Topic: (evaluation OR testing OR assessment) AND Topic: ("computer-aided diagnosis system" OR "computer-aided diagnosis scheme" OR "computer-assisted diagnosis scheme" OR "computer-assisted diagnosis system" OR "diagnosis support system") |

### Conduction and data extraction

The searches were carried out between April and June 2014. In total, 156 studies were retrieved. As a whole, 100 studies (64.10%) were included, 96 of which had CAD schemes and the employed assessment methodologies. Four papers contained conceptual contents as described in the subsection "Review and theoretical papers".

Every conduction stage of the SR was duly documented based on the models proposed in Biolchini et al. [6] and Kitchenham [5]. The produced documents and the tools used are described below.

**Conduction form:** One form was produced for each consulted database. They document all the relevant information of the search: access dates, a composition of terms used, a list of retrieved studies and their satisfied inclusion criteria and other observations.

**Data extraction form:** For each included study, in addition to the bibliographic and reference information, a summary of the study and documented topics of interest were included. The main topics of interest extracted included: the purpose of the system used/proposed, assessment method of the employed CAD, modality and number of images/cases used in the test, main tests and results and other information relevant research.

**FIGURE 1** shows a flow diagram, based on Liberati et al. [7], which summarizes the selection of the studies.

**FIGURE 1. Flow diagram summarizing the selection studies stage.**

*   Literature search: ACM Digital Library, IEEE Xplore, ScienceDirect, Web of Science
*   Search results combined (n = 198)
*   Articles screened on basis of title and abstract
    *   Excluded (n = 80)
    *   Included (n = 118)
        *   They did not evaluate CAD systems: 25
        *   Multiple publications: 3
        *   Full text not available: 10
        *   Duplicates removed: 42
*   Manuscript review and application of inclusion criteria
    *   Included (n = 100)
    *   Excluded (n = 18)
        *   They did not evaluate CAD systems: 15
        *   They did not use image processing or graphical outputs: 3
*   Present and evaluate CAD schemes (n=96)
*   Theoretical papers or reviews on CAD (n=4)

**TABLE 2** shows the studies included, and their satisfied inclusion criteria. We retrieved studies published in scientific journals, conference proceedings and other collections of articles. In particular, a significant variety of medical publications, computational intelligence, and imaging processing and analyses (other than pattern recognition) were observed. **TABLE 3**, **TABLE 4** and **TABLE 5** show the sources from which studies included in this SR were taken. The next section presents and discusses the results obtained through this SR.

**TABLE 2. Criteria met by each included paper.**

| Reference | Criteria | Reference | Criteria |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Al-Absi et al. (2012) | (b) | López et al. (2011) | (a)(b) |
| Ampeliotis et al. (2007) | (b) | Muramatsu et al. (2013) | (b) |
| Ashwin et al. (2012) | (a)(b) | Markkongkeaw et al. (2013) | (b) |
| Barhoumi et al. (2007) | (b) | Martinez-Murcia et al. (2014) | (b) |
| Beuren et al. (2012) | (a)(b) | Mironicã et al. (2011) | (b) |
| Bevilacqua (2013) | (a)(b) | Miyaki et al. (2013) | (b) |
| Bhooshan et al. (2011) | (b) | Moon et al. (2011) | (b) |
| Chan (2010) | (b) | Mumcuoglu et al. (2011) | (a)(b) |
| Chang et al. (2006) | (b) | Muramatsu et al. (2013) | (b) |
| Charbonnier et al. (2013) | (a)(b) | Nagata et al. (2013) | (b) |
| Charisis et al. (2013) | (b) | Nava et al. (2014) | (b) |
| Cheng et al. (2012) | (a)(b) | Odeh et al. (2006) | (a)(b) |
| David et al. (2008) | (b) | Osman et al. (2009) | (a)(b) |
| Elizabeth et al. (2012) | (a)(b) | Pietka et al. (2010) | (a)(b) |
| Endo et al. (2012) | (a)(b) | Pietka et al. (2011) | (a)(c) |
| Filipczuk et al. (2013) | (b) | Raja et al. (2007) | (b) |
| Garcia-Orellana et al. (2008) | (b) | Raja et al. (2010) | (b) |
| Garnavi et al. (2011) | (a)(b) | Ramírez et al. (2009) | (b) |
| Garnavi et al. (2012) | (b) | Ramos et al. (2012) | (a)(b) |
| Gedik and Atasoy (2013) | (a)(b) | Retter et al. (2013) | (b) |
| Geetha et al. (2008) | (a)(b) | Roberts et al. (2010) | (b) |
| Giannakopoulou et al. (2010) | (b) | Sanchez et al. (2011) | (a)(b) |
| Gomathi and Thangaraj (2010) | (b) | Sasaki et al. (2010) | (b) |
| Gopinath and Shanthi (2013) | (a)(b) | Sato et al. (2011) | (a)(b) |
| Grana et al. (2011) | (b) | Schilham et al. (2006) | (a)(b) |
| Gruszauskas et al. (2008) | (a)(b) | Segovia et al. (2012) | (a)(b) |
| Gruszauskas et al. (2009) | (b) | Shen et al. (2007) | (a)(b) |
| Haindl et al. (2007) | (b) | Shilaskar and Ghatol (2013) | (a)(b) |
| Hatanaka et al. (2011) | (b) | Shiraishi et al. (2009) | (a)(c) |
| He et al. (2011) | (b) | Song et al. (2010) | (a)(b) |
| Hebert et al. (2012) | (b) | Streba et al. (2012) | (b) |
| Huang et al. (2007) | (b) | Suganthi and Madheswaran (2010) | (b) |
| Huang et al. (2009a) | (b) | Sulaiman et al. (2012) | (b) |
| Huang et al. (2009b) | (a)(b) | Tahmasbi et al. (2011) | (b) |
| Alvarez Illán et al. (2010) | (b) | Tan et al. (2010) | (a)(b) |
| Itai et al. (2009) | (b) | Tanner et al. (2006) | (b) |
| Jasmine et al. (2009) | (b) | Tolouee et al. (2011) | (b) |
| Korfiatis et al. (2007) | (b) | Usha and Sandya (2013) | (b) |
| Korotkov and Garcia (2012) | (c) | Verikas et al. (2006) | (b) |
| Kovacs et al. (2006) | (a)(b) | Verma (2009) | (b) |
| Kuang and Ye (2008) | (b) | Vertan et al. (2011) | (b) |
| Kumar et al. (2011) | (a)(b) | Voigt et al. (2010) | (b) |
| Lartizien et al. (2014) | (a)(b) | Volpi et al. (2009) | (b) |
| Lee et al. (2009) | (a)(b) | Wada et al. (2006) | (b) |
| Lerdsinmongkol et al. (2011) | (a)(b) | Wang et al. (2009) | (b) |
| Li et al. (2009) | (a)(b) | Wittenberg et al. (2012) | (b) |
| Li et al. (2012) | (a)(b) | Wu et al. (2006) | (b) |
| Liu et al. (2012) | (a)(b) | Xiao et al. (2010) | (b) |
| Liu et al. (2013) | (b) | Zhang et al. (2011) | (a)(c) |
| López et al. (2008) | (b) | Zheng et al. (2008) | (a)(b) |

**TABLE 3. Journals that provided the included papers.**

| Journals |
| :--- |
| Academic Radiology (ISSN: 1076-6332) |
| ACM Journal of Data and Information Quality (ISSN: 1936-1955) |
| Artificial Intelligence in Medicine (ISSN: 0933-3657) |
| Australasian Physical & Engineering Sciences in Medicine (ISSN: 0158-9938) |
| Biomedical Engineering/Biomedizinische Technik (ISSN: 1862-278X) |
| Biomedical Signal Processing and Control (ISSN: 1746-8094) |
| Clinical Neurology and Neurosurgery (ISSN: 0303-8467) |
| Computers in Biology and Medicine (ISSN: 0010-4825) |
| Electronics Letters (ISSN: 0013-5194) |
| EURASIP Journal on Advances in Signal Processing (ISSN: 1687-6180) |
| Expert Systems (ISSN: 1468-0394) |
| Expert Systems with Applications (ISSN: 0957-4174) |
| IEEE Journal of Biomedical and Health Informatics (ISSN: 2168-2194) |
| IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Signal Processing (ISSN: 1932-4553) |
| IEEE Transactions on Information Technology in Biomedicine (ISSN: 1089-7771) |
| IEEE Transactions on Nuclear Science (ISSN: 0018-9499) |
| International Journal of Computer Assisted Radiology and Surgery (ISSN: 1861-6410) |
| Investigative Ophthalmology & Visual Science (ISSN: 0146-0404) |
| Journal of Gastroenterology and Hepatology (ISSN: 1440-1746) |
| Machine Vision and Applications (ISSN: 0932-8092) |
| Magnetic Resonance in Medicine (ISSN: 1522-2594) |
| Medical & Biological Engineering & Computing (ISSN: 0140-0118) |
| Medical Image Analysis (ISSN: 1361-8415) |
| Medical Physics (ISSN: 0094-2405) |
| Neurocomputing (ISSN: 0925-2312) |
| Neuroscience Letters (ISSN: 0304-3940) |
| Nuclear Medicine Communications (ISSN: 0143-3636) |
| Osteoporosis International (ISSN: 0937-941X) |
| Pattern Recognition Letters (ISSN: 0167-8655) |
| Radiology (ISSN: 0033-8419) |
| Skin Research and Technology (ISSN: 1600-0846) |
| Turkish Journal of Electrical Engineering & Computer Sciences (ISSN: 1300-0632) |
| Ultrasound in Medicine & Biology (ISSN: 0301-5629) |
| World Journal of Gastroenterology (ISSN: 1007-9327) |

**TABLE 4. Collections that provided the included papers.**

| Collections |
| :--- |
| Advances in Neuro-Information Processing (Lecture Notes in Computer Science, ISBN: 978-3-642-02489-4) |
| Advances in Visual Computing - Part II (Lecture Notes in Computer Science, ISBN: 978-3-540-48626-8) |
| Computer Analysis of Images and Patterns (Lecture Notes in Computer Science, ISBN: 978-3-540-74271-5) |
| Digital Mammography (Lecture Notes in Computer Science, ISBN: 978-3-540-35625-7) |
| Image Analysis and Recognition (Lecture Notes in Computer Science, ISBN: 978-3-540-44894-5) |
| Knowledge-Based Intelligent Information and Engineering Systems (Lecture Notes in Computer Science, ISBN: 978-3-540-74828-1) |
| Medical Biometrics (Lecture Notes in Computer Science, ISBN: 978-3-642-13922-2) |
| Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention - MICCAI 2009 (Lecture Notes in Computer Science, ISBN: 978-3-642-04270-6) |
| Medical Imaging and Augmented Reality (Lecture Notes in Computer Science, ISBN: 978-3-540-37220-2) |
| Progress in Pattern Recognition, Image Analysis and Applications (Lecture Notes in Computer Science, ISBN: 978-3-540-85919-2) |

**TABLE 5. Proceedings that provided the included papers.**

| Proceedings |
| :--- |
| Annual ACM Bangalore Conference |
| Annual IEEE India Conference |
| Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society |
| Biomedical Engineering International Conference |
| Congress on Image and Signal Processing |
| E-Health and Bioengineering Conference |
| IEEE International Conference on Control System, Computing and Engineering |
| IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Biomimetics |
| IEEE International Conference on Signal Processing and Communications |
| IEEE International Symposium on Biomedical Imaging |
| IEEE International Workshop on Imaging Systems and Techniques |
| International Conference and Workshop on Emerging Trends in Technology |
| International Conference on Advances in Computing, Communications and Informatics |
| International Conference on Biomedical Engineering and Informatics |
| International Conference on Computer Information Science |
| International Conference on Computing: Theory and Applications |
| International Conference on Control, Automation, Communication and Energy Conservation |
| International Conference on Emerging Trends in Electrical Engineering and Energy Management |
| International Conference on Natural Computation |
| International Conference on Signal Processing |
| International Conference on Signal Processing, Communication, Computing and Networking Technologies |
| International Conference on Signal Processing, Communications and Networking |
| International Joint Conference on Neural Networks |
| International Symposium on Applied Sciences in Biomedical and Communication Technologies |
| International Symposium on Computer-Based Medical Systems |
| International Symposium on Intelligent Information Technology Application |
| International Symposium on Signals, Circuits and Systems |
| Iranian Conference of Biomedical Engineering |
| National Radio Science Conference |
| SPIE Medical Imaging: Computer-Aided Diagnosis |
| SPIE Medical Imaging: Image Perception, Observer Performance and Technology Assessment |

## Results and Discussion

**TABLE 6** presents the 98 CAD systems reported in the 96 included studies (Pietka et al. [19] reported the development of three distinct systems). In the following subsections, an overview of the state of the art regarding the development and assessment of CAD systems is presented based on the studies included through the SR.

### Abnormalities studied

As seen in **TABLE 6**, there is a significant variety of abnormalities that are currently subjects of study for the development of CAD systems. As shown in **FIGURE 2**, breast cancer and lung cancer are the diseases most commonly studied within the scope of this SR. Such evidence is significant, considering the importance of early diagnoses of many different types of neoplasia is well known.

In addition to the diseases mentioned, other abnormalities were also reported, encompassing the processing of medical images of different structures and organs of the human body, including brain, skin, retina, bones, heart, arteries, liver, ear, prostate, and gastrointestinal tract, among others (**TABLE 6**). CAD systems are the subject of study and research with applicability in a wide range of various medical areas. Although many approaches are still far from clinical application, the variety of ideas, techniques and application areas show that one can expect significant development in computational applications for the diagnosis of many well-known abnormalities.

### Modalities of medical imaging exploited

Different types of medical imaging have been objects of study for the development of CAD systems. This statement is confirmed by observing the results of this SR. From the 29 systems that reported dealing with breast cancer, eighteen (62.07%) addressed mammograms. Mammography is the most effective technique for the early diagnosis of breast cancer [8]. Thus, the utilization of such images is still very important due to the possibility that a physician may misread or misinterpret an exam [9–12]. Five other systems (17.24%) reported work with ultrasound imaging, a technique that has been very important, in conjunction with mammography, in increasing the precision of breast cancer diagnosis [8, 13, 14]. Other reported imaging modalities dealing with breast cancer included magnetic resonance imaging (10.34%), microscopic/cytologic imaging (6.90%) and digital tomosynthesis (3.45%). Works with magnetic resonance, microscopic/cytologic imaging and digital tomosynthesis have only been recently developed, which suggests the use of new imaging techniques to aid in breast cancer diagnoses.

The literature search also yielded thirteen CAD systems focused on lung cancer, nine of which (69.23%) used images from CT examinations. The other four systems (30.77%) used chest radiography images.

Five systems reported in this review addressed the diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease. Four (80%) used CT images, while only one report used magnetic resonance images.

Four systems reported using images from dermatoscopy examinations to address skin cancer, while only one used images from fluorescence spectroscopy.

Five systems were reported to diagnose eye diseases affecting the retina using processed retinography images. In turn, the system used to diagnose nuclear cataracts [15] worked with images obtained by means of a slit lamp.

The graph in **FIGURE 3** presents the number of systems for each medical imaging method in the studies. In this graph, each reported system is evaluated for modality, independent of the studied abnormality. As seen, images from CTs and mammographies were the most exploited for the development of CAD systems.

**TABLE 6. CAD systems presented in the included papers of the SR.**

| Reference | Disease | Imaging modality | Interest | Evaluation methods |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Kovacs et al. (2006) | Acute aortic dissection | Computed Tomography | Segmentation of the Aortic Dissection Membrane | Average distance between automatic segmentation and ground truth |
| Chan (2010) | Acute intracranial hemorrhage | Computed Tomography | Detection | FP rate per case and per image, ROC (and area under the ROC curve), sensitivity |
| Charbonnier et al. (2013) | Acute ischemic stroke | Computed Tomography Angiography | Detection of hypoperfused brain areas | Positive predictive value, ROC (and area under the ROC curve), sensitivity |
| Chang et al. (2006) | Acute ischemic stroke | Magnetic Resonance | ROIs segmentation | Volume (mm3). Comparison with other approaches. Ground truth based on manual calculation of size and volume. Performance based on execution time and application usability. |
| Álvarez Illán et al. (2010) | Alzheimer's disease | Computed Tomography | Classification | Correct classification rate (accuracy), sensitivity, specificity |
| Ramírez et al. (2009) | Alzheimer's disease | Computed Tomography | Detection | Correct detection rate (accuracy), sensitivity, specificity |
| López et al. (2011) | Alzheimer's disease | Computed Tomography | Detection | Correct detection rate (accuracy), positive and negative likelihood rate, ROC (and area under the ROC curve), sensitivity, specificity |
| Segovia et al. (2012) | Alzheimer's disease | Computed Tomography | Detection | Negative likelihood, positive likelihood, ROC, sensitivity, specificity |
| Grana et al. (2011) | Alzheimer's disease | Magnetic Resonance | Detection | Correct detection rate (accuracy), sensitivity, specificity |
| Huang et al. (2007) | Bone lesions | Bone Scintigraphy | Lesion detection | Number of FP per case, sensitivity |
| Huang et al. (2009a) | Bone lesions | Computed Tomography | Lesion detection | Correct detection rate (accuracy), number of FP, number of FN |
| Sato et al. (2011) | Brain atrophy | Magnetic Resonance | Segmentation of brain tissues | F-value, Overlap |
| Xiao et al. (2010) | Brain pathologies | Computed Tomography | Detection | ROC (and area under the ROC curve), sensitivity, specificity |
| Wittenberg et al. (2012) | Breast cancer | Digital Tomosynthesis | Lesion segmentation | Over-segmentation, under-segmentation |
| Tanner et al. (2006) | Breast cancer | Magnetic Resonance | Lesion classification | ROC (and area under the ROC curve) |
| Retter et al. (2013) | Breast cancer | Magnetic Resonance | Lesions classification | ROC (and area under the ROC curve) |
| Bhooshan et al. (2011) | Breast cancer | Magnetic Resonance | Classification (probability of malignancy) | P-value, ROC (and area under the ROC curve) |
| Tahmasbi et al. (2011) | Breast cancer | Mammography | Classification | FN Rate, FP rate, ROC (and area under the ROC curve) |
| Wu et al. (2006) | Breast cancer | Mammography | Classification | FP rate, FROC curve, sensitivity |
| López et al. (2008) | Breast cancer | Mammography | Classification | TP rate, positive predictive value |
| Muramatsu et al. (2013) | Breast cancer | Mammography | Classification | ROC (and area under the ROC curve) |
| Wang et al. (2009) | Breast cancer | Mammography | Detection | ROC (and area under the ROC curve) |
| Ramos et al. (2012) | Breast cancer | Mammography | Lesion detection | ROC (and area under the ROC curve) |
| Song et al. (2010) | Breast cancer | Mammography | Lesion segmentation | Difference between edges based in distances, Overlap, over-segmentation, under-segmentation |
| Geetha et al. (2008) | Breast cancer | Mammography | Microcalcification classification | ROC, sensitivity, specificity |
| Jasmine et al. (2009) | Breast cancer | Mammography | Microcalcification classification | Sensitivity |
| Osman et al. (2009) | Breast cancer | Mammography | Microcalcification classification | Sensitivity, specificity |
| Giannakopoulou et al. (2010) | Breast cancer | Mammography | Microcalcification classification | ROC (and area under the ROC curve), sensitivity, specificity |
| Garcia-Orellana et al. (2008) | Breast cancer | Mammography | Microcalcification detection | FROC, sensitivity |
| Gedik and Atasoy (2013) | Breast cancer | Mammography | ROIs classification | Correct classification rate (accuracy), ROC, sensitivity, specificity |
| Verma (2009) | Breast cancer | Mammography | ROIs classification | Correct classification rate (accuracy) |
| Haindl et al. (2007) | Breast cancer | Mammography | ROIs segmentation | Indexes of the Prague Texture Segmentation Datagenerator and Benchmark [47] |
| Zheng et al. (2008) | Breast cancer | Mammography | ROIs segmentation and classification | Segmentation: relative area difference; Classification: ROC (and area under the ROC curve) |
| He et al. (2011) | Breast cancer | Mammography | Segmentation of tissue structure and risk classification | Segmentation: comparison between automated and manual segmentation; Risk classification: satisfaction of health professionals, sensitivity |
| Suganthi and Madheswaran (2010) | Breast cancer | Mammography | Tumor classification | Correct classification rate (accuracy), ROC (and area under the ROC curve) |
| Filipczuk et al. (2013) | Breast cancer | Microscopic/Cytologic Images | Classification | Classification: correct classification rate (accuracy), Matthews correlation coefficient, sensitivity, specificity |
| Markkongkeaw et al. (2013) | Breast cancer | Microscopic/Cytologic Images (breast tissue cells) | Classification of histological structures | Correct classification rate (accuracy) |
| Lee et al. (2009) | Breast cancer | Ultrasonography | Lesion classification | Correct classification rate (accuracy), Fisher estimator, negative predictive value, precision, ROC (and area under the ROC curve), sensitivity, specificity |
| Gruszauskas et al. (2008) | Breast cancer | Ultrasonography | Lesion classification | Segmentation: Overlap; Classification: ROC (and area under the ROC curve) |
| Shen et al. (2007) | Breast cancer | Ultrasonography | Lesion classification | Level of agreement between the results of the radiologists and the system: Kappa's statistics; Classification: correct classification rate (accuracy), negative predictive value, precision, ROC (and area under the ROC curve), sensitivity, specificity |
| Gruszauskas et al. (2009) | Breast cancer | Ultrasonography | Lesion classification | ROC (and area under the ROC curve) |
| Moon et al. (2011) | Breast cancer | Ultrasonography | Nodule classification | Correct classification rate (accuracy), negative predictive value, positive predictive value, P-value, ROC (and area under the ROC curve), sensitivity, specificity |
| Shilaskar and Ghatol (2013) | Cardiovascular diseases | Computed Tomography | Detection | Correct detection rate (accuracy), sensitivity, specificity |
| Liu et al. (2012) | Cardiovascular diseases | Magnetic Resonance | Segmentation of left ventricle | Average perpendicular distance, Dice's coefficient, Left Ventricle ejection fraction, Left Ventricle mass, percentage of good contours |
| Sulaiman et al. (2012) | Cervical cancer | Microscopic/Cytologic Images (cervical cells) | Lesion classification | Correct classification rate (accuracy), sensitivity, specificity |
| Nava et al. (2014) | Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (emphysema) | Computed Tomography | Emphysema classification | Correct classification rate (accuracy) |
| Bevilacqua (2013) | Colon and rectal cancers | Computed Tomography Colonography | Polyps detection | Correct detection rate (accuracy), FP rate, sensitivity, specificity |
| Kuang and Ye (2008) | Dental caries | Radiography | Detection of caries | Sensitivity |
| David et al. (2008) | Diabetic retinopathy | Retinography | Classification | Correct classification rate (accuracy) |
| Hatanaka et al. (2011) | Diabetic retinopathy | Retinography | Hemorrhage detection | sensitivity, specificity |
| Sanchez et al. (2011) | Diabetic retinopathy | Retinography | Lesion detection | ROC (and area under the ROC curve), sensitivity, specificity |
| Voigt et al. (2010) | Functional voice disorders | Endoscopy and Phonovibrograms | Frequency classification of vocal fold movements | Correct classification rate (accuracy) |
| Miyaki et al. (2013) | Gastric cancer | Endoscopy | Detection | Correct detection rate (accuracy), ROC, sensitivity, specificity |
| Tan et al. (2010) | Glaucoma | Retinography | Segmentation of optic cup | Area overlap error (1 - Overlap), relative area difference |
| Tolouee et al. (2011) | Interstitial lung diseases | Computed Tomography | Classification of lung tissue patterns | Confusion matrix, correct classification rate (accuracy), Kappa's statistic, sensitivity, specificity |
| Raja et al. (2007) | Kidney disorders | Ultrasonography | Classification of kidney disorders | Correct classification rate (accuracy) |
| Kumar et al. (2011) | Liver cancer | Computed Tomography | Tumor detection | Correct detection rate (accuracy), negative predictive value, positive predictive value, sensitivity, specificity |
| Streba et al. (2012) | Liver cancer | Ultrasonography | Classification of several types of liver cancer | Correct classification rate (accuracy), negative predictive value, positive predictive value, sensitivity, specificity |
| Korfiatis et al. (2007) | Lung cancer | Computed Tomography | Lung Segmentation | Segmentation: Overlap; Correctness of the segmented edge: average, difference in the shape of the segmented edge, maximum distance between segmented volumes, root mean square |
| Volpi et al. (2009) | Lung cancer | Computed Tomography | Mediastinum segmentation | Rate of carcinogenic areas extracted correctly (accuracy) |
| Gomathi and Thangaraj (2010) | Lung cancer | Computed Tomography | Nodule detection | Number of FP per case, number of TP detected by CAD versus number of TP detected by specialist, sensitivity |
| Itai et al. (2009) | Lung cancer | Computed Tomography | Nodule detection | Number of FP per case, sensitivity |
| Ashwin et al. (2012) | Lung cancer | Computed Tomography | Nodule detection | Detection (network performance): confusion matrix, correct detection rate (accuracy), FP rate, mean square error, regression analysis, ROC (and area under the ROC curve), sensitivity, specificity |
| Wada et al. (2006) | Lung cancer | Computed Tomography | Nodule detection | Number of FP per slice, positive predictive value |
| Pietka et al. (2010) (a) | Lung cancer | Computed Tomography | Nodule detection | FP rate, sensitivity |
| Endo et al. (2012) | Lung cancer | Computed Tomography | Nodule segmentation and classification | Segmentation: Dice's coefficient; Classification: Correct classification rate (accuracy) |
| Elizabeth et al. (2012) | Lung cancer | Computed Tomography | Lung segmentation | Correct region detection rate (accuracy), precision, sensitivity (recall), specificity |
| Nagata et al. (2013) | Lung cancer | Radiography | Nodule detection | FROC curve, number of FP per image, sensitivity |
| Al-Absi et al. (2012) | Lung cancer | Radiography | Nodule detection | Correct detection rate (accuracy), FN rate, FP rate |
| Schilham et al. (2006) | Lung cancer | Radiography | Nodule detection | Segmentation: Overlap; Detection: FROC |
| Sasaki et al. (2010) | Lung cancer and other lung abnormalities | Radiography | Abnormalities detection | FN rate (FRR - False Rejection Rate), FP rate (FAR - False Acceptance Rate) |
| Lartizien et al. (2014) | Lymphoma | Computed Tomography | Classification | ROC (and area under the ROC curve), TOP10 method |
| Pietka et al. (2010) (b) | Multiple sclerosis | Magnetic Resonance | Detection of brain lesions | Sensitivity, specificity, similarity |
| Huang et al. (2009b) | Nuclear cataract | Slit lamp | Classification | Ranking of cases: normalized discounted cumulative gain; Classification: accuracy in the prediction of score to images, mean error between predicted scores and scores defined by experts |
| Muramatsu et al. (2013) | Osteoporosis | Radiography | Detection of osteoporotic risk | Sensitivity, specificity |
| Roberts et al. (2010) | Osteoporosis | Radiography | Detection of vertebral fractures | FP rate, ROC, sensitivity |
| Vertan et al. (2011) | Oitis | Otoscopy | Oitis detection | Correct detection rate (accuracy) |
| Mironică et al. (2011) | Oitis | Otoscopy | Oitis detection | Correct detection rate (accuracy) |
| Usha and Sandya (2013) | Ovarian abnormalities | Ultrasonography | Segmentation, measurement and feature extraction of ovarian | Percentage of error in the measurements (based on measurements made manually by experts) |
| Martinez-Murcia et al. (2014) | Parkinson | Computed Tomography | Detection | Correct detection rate (accuracy), negative likelihood, positive likelihood, sensitivity, specificity |
| Hebert et al. (2012) | Pathological state of pulmonary alveoli | Confocal Microscopy | Classification | Correct classification rate (accuracy) |
| Lerdsinmongkol et al. (2011) | Pleural mesothelioma | Computed Tomography | Pleural segmentation | Bit quads, 3D connected component labeling |
| Pietka et al. (2010) (c) | Pneumothorax | Computed Tomography | Segmentation | Sensitivity, specificity |
| Ampeliotis et al. (2007) | Prostate cancer | Magnetic Resonance | Classification of prostate tissues | Correct classification rate (accuracy) |
| Liu et al. (2013) | Prostate cancer | Magnetic Resonance | Detection | ROC (and area under the ROC curve) |
| Mumcuoglu et al. (2011) | Renal cortical scars | Renal Cortical Scintigraphy | Detection of cortical scars | FROC |
| Raja et al. (2010) | Renal cysts | Ultrasonography | Classification of cases | Cross validation with specialist analysis results, F-score, ROC |
| Cheng et al. (2012) | Retinal diseases | Retinography | Segmentation of optic disk | Area overlap error (1 - Overlap) |
| Garnavi et al. (2011) | Skin cancer | Dermatoscopy | Detection of melanoma edges | Correct detection rate (accuracy), edge error, positive predictive value, sensitivity, similarity, specificity |
| Barhoumi et al. (2007) | Skin cancer | Dermatoscopy | Lesion classification | Correct classification rate (accuracy), precision versus revocation, ROC |
| Beuren et al. (2012) | Skin cancer | Dermatoscopy | Lesion segmentation | correct pixel classification rate (accuracy), error, F-measure, misclassification error, negative rate metric, precision, relative area difference, sensitivity (recall), Number of TP-TN-FP-FN |
| Garnavi et al. (2012) | Skin cancer | Dermatoscopy | Melanoma classification | Correct classification rate (accuracy), ROC (and area under the ROC curve) |
| Odeh et al. (2006) | Skin cancer | Fluorescence Spectroscopy | Lesion classification | Correct classification rate (accuracy), sensitivity, specificity |
| Li et al. (2012) | Subarachnoid hemorrhage | Computed Tomography | Segmentation of subarachnoid space and Hemorrhage detection | Segmentation: Dice's index, Overlap (relative overlap), spatial overlap; Detection: sensitivity, specificity |
| Gopinath and Shanthi (2013) | Thyroid cancer | Microscopic/Cytologic Images | Classification | Correct classification rate (accuracy), sensitivity, specificity |
| Charisis et al. (2013) | Ulcer | Endoscopy | Detection of ulcer regions | Correct detection rate (accuracy), sensitivity, specificity |
| Li et al. (2009) | Ulcer | Wireless Capsule Endoscopy | Detection of small bowel ulcer | Correct detection rate (accuracy), sensitivity, specificity |
| Verikas et al. (2006) | Vocal cord diseases | Vocal Cord Images | Classification | Correct classification rate (accuracy) |

**FIGURE 2. Number of CAD systems used for each abnormality.**

| Category | Percentage |
| :--- | :--- |
| Breast cancer | 27.55% |
| Lung cancer | 29.59% |
| Alzheimer's disease | 13.27% |
| Skin cancer | 5.10% |
| Diabetic retinopathy | 5.10% |
| Acute ischemic stroke | 3.00% |
| Bone lesions | 2.00% |
| Cardiovascular diseases | 2.00% |
| Liver cancer | 2.00% |
| Osteoporosis | 2.00% |
| Oitis | 2.00% |
| Prostate cancer | 2.00% |
| Ulcer | 2.00% |
| Others | 2.00% |

**FIGURE 3. Number of CAD systems used for each medical imaging modality.**

| Category | Value |
| :--- | :--- |
| Computed Tomography | 6 |
| Magnetic Resonance | 28 |
| Ultrasonography | 18 |
| Radiography | 10 |
| Microscopic/Cytologic Images | 9 |
| Retinography | 7 |
| Dermatoscopy | 5 |
| Endoscopy | 5 |
| Otoscopy | 4 |
| Others | 2 |

### Tasks for computer-aided diagnosis systems

Each developed technique performed a specific task utilizing a computer-aided diagnosis. In general, a complete CAD system involved segmented structures, the detection of abnormalities and the extraction of their characteristics for a subsequent classification of the problem (e.g., normal, benign or malignant, depending on the case). For example, to classify structures, the previous stages of segmentation and detection are required. Studies with CAD schemes have contributed to the automation of these tasks, either by means of developing a new technique or improving an existing technique. For each task of interest, the charts presented in **FIGURE 4**, **FIGURE 5** and **FIGURE 6** show the number of reported systems that contributed innovations.

**FIGURE 4. Tasks executed in the CAD systems: tasks of CAD systems for breast cancer.**

| Category | Percentage |
| :--- | :--- |
| Abnormalities or ROIs classification | 22 |
| Abnormalities or ROIs segmentation | 10.34 |
| Risk classification | 3 |
| Abnormalities detection | 3 |
| Abnormalities or ROIs classification | 3.45 |
| Abnormalities or ROIs segmentation | 1 |

**FIGURE 5. Tasks executed in the CAD systems: tasks of CAD systems for lung cancer.**

| Category | Percentage |
| :--- | :--- |
| Nodule detection | 969.23% |
| Lung or mediastinum segmentation | 23.08% |
| Nodule classification | 7.69% |

**FIGURE 6. Tasks executed in the CAD systems: tasks of all reported systems.**

| Category | Percentage |
| :--- | :--- |
| Abnormalities, ROIs or tissues classification | 40.82% |
| Abnormalities or ROIs detection | 40.82% |
| Abnormalities, ROIs or tissues segmentation | 16.33% |
| Frequency classification of movements | 1.02% |
| Risk classification | 1.02% |

Most of the CAD systems used for the diagnosis of breast cancer (**FIGURE 4**) aimed at classifying microcalcifications, lesions or other regions of interest (ROIs). This indicates that the main focus of CAD technology for breast cancer is the identification of suspicious structures in medical images and the determination of whether these structures are benign or malignant (i.e., capable of being cancerous). This can help physicians diagnose the disease and its severity level, thereby reducing chances of misinterpretation and aiding in determining recommended treatments.

He et al. [91] presented an approach to risk classifications for breast cancer, i.e., a formula to determine the risk of developing the disease. This risk was estimated by analyzing mammary tissue patterns through mammography.

For lung cancer CAD systems (**FIGURE 5**), most systems were designed to detect nodules. Regardless of the disease studied, it can be seen that the main tasks of interest were the detection and classification of abnormalities (**FIGURE 6**). This was expected because these are the tasks that most reflect the contribution of CAD systems.

Among the reported systems in the reviewed studies, different techniques have been proposed to complete the different aforementioned tasks. Systems utilizing segmentation used techniques based on thresholding [16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 24], morphological operators [21, 22, 23, 24, 25], fuzzy k-means clustering [21, 23, 26], region growing [26, 27], and Gaussian mixture models [28, 29], among others.

For systems focused on detecting abnormalities, images were analyzed by using techniques to segment structures in the images. A few of the segmentation techniques were based on the Fuzzy Set Theory [31, 19], thresholding [31, 70] and models [72, 89]. Detection approaches were based on the use of classifiers, such as artificial neural networks [16, 71, 72, 69, 68, 67, 73, 59, 70], k-nearest neighbor [64, 67, 59, 66, 89], support vectors machine [57, 67, 58, 59, 60, 61, 63, 62] and probabilistic classifiers [23, 77, 59, 53, 90].

Finally, for classification tasks, we observed the use of classifiers such as k-nearest neighbor [74, 75, 76, 91, 77, 78, 79, 11, 81, 92], artificial neural networks [49, 50, 10, 52, 84, 83, 12, 51], Bayesian classifiers [86, 54, 87, 48, 88, 55, 56] techniques based on linear discriminant analysis [13, 77, 90] and logistic regression models [14, 90].

A few studies combined clustering algorithms with classification algorithms. He et al. [91] and Raja et al. [81] both used the k-means and k-nearest neighbor algorithms. Verma [12] used a clustering algorithm with artificial neural networks trained with back propagation. Barhoumi et al. [49] classified skin lesions by combining results from artificial neural networks with results of a content-based image retrieval (CBIR) scheme through the Dempster-Shafer Theory.

### Public databases of medical images

One of the difficulties encountered in the development of CAD systems is the lack of availability of test cases. It is not always possible to obtain a medical image database containing various acquisition characteristics, structures or abnormalities that a technique requires for the detection, analysis or diagnosis of a disease. Factors such as partnerships with clinics and hospitals, ethical issues, and image access permissions, tend to hamper the task.

For this reason, a few projects have been developed and maintained aiming to provide medical images for research groups that develop CAD technologies. These projects consist of public databases of medical images that document reports made by physicians and often include information about structures of interest in the images.

We cataloged various public databases from the systems reported in the studies.

**Digital Database for Screening Mammography - DDSM** [72, 28, 77, 80, 98, 20, 12, 62, 27]: maintained by the University of South Florida, this database serves as a resource for research in mammographic imaging analysis [39]. The database contains 2,620 cases divided into 43 volumes, each composed of normal cases, cases containing suspicious structures proved benign or proven cases of cancer. Delineations of regions of interest (i.e., ground truth regions), if any, are provided. A set of programs for decoding and manipulating mammography images are also included.

**The mini-MIAS database of mammograms** [75, 50, 91, 10, 52, 11, 17, 51]: this database is maintained by the Mammographic Image Analysis Society (MIAS) and offers 322 mammograms for use in research. In addition to mammograms, the database contains information concerning the type, severity and coordinates of the central pixel of abnormalities, if any, in each image [40].

**Lung Image Database Consortium - LIDC** [17, 19]: this public database is the result of an initiative that aimed to provide chest CT images to support the development, training and assessment of CAD schemes for the detection of pulmonary nodules [41]. The database provides exams of 1,010 patients, delimitations of existing lesions, and a software for the manipulation of images.

**Japanese Society of Radiological Technology (JSRT) database** [64, 82, 89]: this database of chest radiographs of the JSRT was created in cooperation with the Japan Radiological Society in 1998. It consists of 247 images, comprising 154 cases of a single pulmonary nodule (grouped by subtlety) and 93 cases without nodules. It also provides information about patients (e.g., age and gender), diagnoses (i.e., benign or malignant) and central coordinates of each node [42].

**MESSIDOR Digital Retinal Images** [66]: the MESSIDOR database was developed to facilitate CAD studies for diabetic retinopathy. It contains 1,200 images of the eye fundus. Moreover, for each image, it provides scores given by experts indicating the level of the retinopathy, and the risk of macular edema [43].

**Digital Retinal Images for Vessel Extraction - DRIVE** [33, 96]: this database was established with the aim of enabling a comparative study on the segmentation of blood vessels in retinal images. To this end, 40 photographs of the retina (eye fundus) are available. For each photo, there are two manually segmented blood vessel images [44]. Researchers who use the database to test methods for segmentation of blood vessels can submit their results through the home-page of the project, to make them available for comparison with other studies in the area.

**STuctured Analysis of the Retina - STARE** [96]: The STARE project, initiated in 1975 at the University of California, focuses on developing a system to aid in the detection of diseases of the human eye [45]. The project has a database with 402 eye fundus photographs and a corresponding diagnosis for each image.

**Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative - ADNI** [73, 61]: The ADNI [46] has the goal of defining the progression of Alzheimer's disease. To this end, it aims to collect and validate data, such as images from positron emission tomography, magnetic resonance imaging and other sources, to predict the disease. The initiative provides collected data for research purposes. The database contains data and images on 895 patients.

### Assessment of CAD systems

As previously mentioned, the main objectives of this SR were to examine and analyze the state of the art of CAD systems. We have already presented the studied abnormalities, medical imaging modalities, tasks of interest and public databases used in the testing and development of the reported systems. In this section, the assessment techniques are discussed.

From **TABLE 6**, we see that assessments of CAD systems involved carrying out segmentations, detections or classifications based on a set of inputs and on previously known correct results (provided mostly by specialists) to obtain performance metrics for the system. None of the assessed studies used test criteria established in the literature, such as functional or structural techniques. From this point of view, the assessment is made on an ad hoc basis.

#### Assessment metrics

**FIGURE 7**, **FIGURE 8** and **FIGURE 9** show charts for each diagnosis and the metrics and assessment methods applied to the reported systems. We only considered mentioned methods. However, for the analysis of these results, we considered the main tasks of each system and any secondary metrics and methods (**FIGURE 7**). For example, if the main task of interest of a given work is the classification of lesions but also reported on the assessment of a previous segmentation task (i.e., mentioning the metrics and/or methods used), these were included in the chart concerning segmentations. For each chart, the total number of reported systems is shown.

**FIGURE 7. Metrics and methods of assessment used in different tasks to aid diagnosis: segmentation (20 systems reported).**

| Evaluation metrics and methods | Not applied (%) | Applied (%) |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Overlap | 14 | 6 |
| Relative area difference | 17 | 3 |
| Dice's coefficient | 17 | 3 |
| Accuracy | 17 | 3 |
| Sensitivity | 17 | 3 |
| F-value | 18 | 2 |
| Over-segmentation | 18 | 2 |
| Under-segmentation | 18 | 2 |
| Precision | 18 | 2 |
| Specificity | 18 | 2 |
| Others | 19 | 1 |

The graph in **FIGURE 7** shows that six systems that assessed a segmentation method applied the overlap measure. This measurement consisted of obtaining the relative area of the intersection between two considered regions [48, 17] by means of assessing the set of pixels resulting from the segmentation process. Given $|A_{seg}|$, the area of an automatically segmented region $A_{seg}$, and $|A_{man}|$, the area of a region $A_{man}$, which is considered correct for the segmentation process (e.g., generated manually), the overlap measure is defined by Equation 1. A value of 0 indicates the worst performance, i.e., there is no intersection between the correct area and the automatically obtained area. A value of 1 indicates a perfect segmentation.

$$ Overlap=\frac{\left|A_{seg}\cap A_{man}\right|}{\left|A_{seg}\cup A_{man}\right|} $$

A relative area difference metric, applied in the assessment of three systems [21, 29, 27], predicts an extension of the automatically segmented region that does not match the expected correct region [29]. This measure can be obtained through Equation 2. It is seen, that if $A_{seg} = A_{man}$, then the relative area difference is 0.

$$ Relative Area Difference=\frac{\left|A_{seg}\right|-\left|A_{man}\right|}{\left|A_{man}\right|} $$

A metric applied to evaluate segmentation results, reported in three systems [30, 23, 18], is Dice's coefficient. This metric calculates overlapping areas between an automatically segmented region and the correct expected region [18]. Equation 3 defines the calculation of this metric. If $\left|A_{seg} \cap A_{man}\right| = \left|A_{seg}\right| = \left|A_{man}\right|$, then a perfect segmentation results (Dice's coefficient = 1).

$$ \mathrm{Dice}^{\prime}\mathrm{coefficient}=\frac{2\times\left|A_{\mathrm{seg}}\cap A_{\mathrm{man}}\right|}{\left|A_{\mathrm{seg}}\right|+\left|A_{\mathrm{man}}\right|} $$

Other metrics that were also observed for the segmentation assessment included accuracy and sensitivity. These metrics are part of a set of very traditional statistic metrics in the assessment of CAD systems. They are based on true positive (TP), true negative (TN), false positive (FP) and false negative (FN) results [31], which are concepts defined by Wagner et al. [32]:

*   **True positive:** a positive detection result of an abnormal structure present in the organ or tissue represented in the image, or a correct classification for a detected structure;
*   **True negative:** a negative detection result of an image of an organ or tissue that does not show any abnormal structure, or a correct classification that indicates an abnormal structure that does not belong to a particular class;
*   **False positive:** a positive detection result of an image of an organ or tissue that does not represent any abnormal structure, or an incorrect classification that indicates a particular structure belonging to a given class when, in fact, it does not; and
*   **False negative:** a negative detection result of an image of an organ or tissue that presents one or more abnormal structures that should be detected, or an incorrect classification that indicates a structure that does not belong to a given class when, in fact, it does.

In the case of segmentation, an approach for the use of these metrics is to define TP pixels (i.e., segmented and within the region of interest), TN (outside the region of interest and not segmented), FP (segmented and not within the region of interest) and FN (within the region of interest and not segmented). Later in this section, these metrics are presented in relation to final results of CAD systems. Other methods and assessment metrics, applicable to segmentation routines, were observed in the reported systems are listed in **TABLE 6** and their references.

The metrics and assessment methods applied for the classification and detection tasks are mostly the same. The graphs in **FIGURE 8** and **FIGURE 9** show the metrics and methods used for each particular task, and the chart in **FIGURE 10** shows the results for both tasks.

**FIGURE 8. Metrics and methods of assessment used in different tasks to aid diagnosis: detection (40 systems reported).**

| Evaluation metrics and methods | Applied | Not applied |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Sensitivity | 29 | 11 |
| Correct detection rate (accuracy) | 19 | 21 |
| Area under the ROC curve | 15 | 25 |
| Number of FP (rate) | 12 | 28 |
| Number of FP (rate) per case | 9 | 31 |
| Precision | 7 | 33 |
| Negative likelihood rate | 4 | 36 |
| Number of FN (rate) | 4 | 36 |
| Number of FP (rate) per image | 3 | 37 |
| Positive likelihood rate | 3 | 37 |
| Similarity | 2 | 38 |
| Others | 3 | 39 |

**FIGURE 9. Metrics and methods of assessment used in different tasks to aid diagnosis: classification (40 systems reported).**

| Evaluation metrics and methods | Applied | Not applied |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Correct classification rate (accuracy) | 23 | 17 |
| ROC | 18 | 22 |
| Sensitivity | 16 | 24 |
| Area under the ROC curve | 15 | 25 |
| Specificity | 14 | 26 |
| Precision | 5 | 35 |
| Negative predictive value | 4 | 36 |
| Number of FP (rate) | 2 | 38 |
| P-value | 2 | 38 |
| Others | 2 | 39 |

As we can be seen, there was a predominant use of metrics based on TP, TN, FP and FN for the assessment of classification and detection tasks in reported systems. In the combined cases, the sensitivity metric is the most considered method for evaluating a CAD system. **TABLE 7** lists the key reported metrics in Garnavi et al. [31].

**TABLE 7. Main metrics and assessment methods reported in the papers.**

| Metrics | Formula | Description |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Sensitivity (or Recall) | $ \frac{\text{TP}}{\text{TP} + \text{FN}} \times 100\% $ | Percentage of abnormalities correctly detected/classified. |
| Specificity | $ \frac{\text{TN}}{\text{TN} + \text{FP}} \times 100\% $ | Percentage of normal structures not incorrectly detected/classified as possible abnormalities. |
| Correct classification / detection rate (Accuracy) | $ \frac{\text{TP} + \text{TN}}{\text{TP} + \text{TN} + \text{FP} + \text{FN}} \times 100\% $ | Percentage of abnormalities and normal structures correctly classified/detected. |
| Similarity | $ \frac{2 \times \text{TP}}{2 \times \text{TP} + \text{FN} + \text{FP}} \times 100\% $ | Representation of the level of matching between the obtained results and the expected results (taken as true). |
| Precision (or Positive predictive value) | $ \frac{\text{TP}}{\text{TP} + \text{FP}} \times 100\% $ | Percentage of detected structures that are actually abnormalities. |
| Negative predictive value | $ \frac{\text{TN}}{\text{TN} + \text{FN}} \times 100\% $ | Percentage of normal structures detected/classified that does not really represent abnormalities. |

#### ROC curve

Another widely known method used in the assessment of CAD systems is the Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) curve. As seen in **FIGURE 7-10**, this method was used to assess 45% of the classification systems reported. **FIGURE 10** combines the applied classification and detection methods and metrics.

This curve represents the sensitivity as a function of the fraction of false positives (FFP = 1 - specificity; [33, 32]). An example of an ROC curve trace is shown in **FIGURE 11**. An ideal CAD system presents an operating point $(0,1)$ on the graph, where 0 represents the minimum FFP and 1 represents the maximum sensitivity. The ROC curve estimates operating points that the CAD system can present with variations of specific parameters. For example, this permits the comparison of performances of multiple techniques, and considers performance changes with parameter variations.

**FIGURE 10. Metrics and methods of assessment used in different tasks to aid diagnosis: classification or detection (80 systems reported).**

| Evaluation metrics and methods | Applied | Not applied |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Sensitivity | 45 | 35 |
| Accuracy | 38 | 42 |
| Specificity | 33 | 47 |
| ROC | 30 | 50 |
| Area under the ROC curve | 24 | 56 |
| Number of FP (rate) | 9 | 71 |
| Precision | 9 | 71 |
| FROC | 5 | 75 |
| Negative predictive value | 5 | 75 |
| Number of FN (rate) | 4 | 76 |
| Confusion matrix | 2 | 78 |

An assessment metric extracted from the ROC curve and often employed in the assessment process of the systems is the area under the ROC curve. The larger the area under the curve, the better the performance of the CAD system. More details regarding this metrics can be obtained in Metz [33] and other included studies.

**FIGURE 11. Example of an ROC curve trace.**

| False positive fraction (1 - specificity) | Sensitivity |
| :--- | :--- |
| 0.0 | 0.0 |
| 0.1 | 0.25 |
| 0.2 | 0.50 |
| 0.3 | 0.65 |
| 0.4 | 0.78 |
| 0.5 | 0.86 |
| 0.6 | 0.92 |
| 0.7 | 0.95 |
| 0.8 | 0.97 |
| 0.9 | 0.98 |
| 1.0 | 1.0 |

#### FROC curve

Another curve used in the assessment of CAD systems is the Free-Response Receiver Operating Characteristic (FROC) curve. This curve represents the sensitivity as a function of the average number of false positives per image [34]. Despite having been employed in few reported systems, this method is worth mentioning given the scope of this SR.

To show the differences between an FROC curve and a conventional ROC curve, Metz [33] used an example of structure detection. A conventional ROC curve provides the probability for a positive region (i.e., containing an abnormal structure) to be diagnosed as positive (sensitivity) and the probability for a negative region (i.e., containing no abnormal structure) to be diagnosed as positive (FFP). An FROC curve provides the probability that a randomly selected lesion will be detected after an average number of FP detections.

Metz [33] also showed that ROC curves are restricted to cases in which there are two detection possibilities for each image or region processed. FROC curves can be used when a lesion may be present in more than one position in each image; the CAD scheme attempts to detect the lesion in all possible locations [33].

### Review and theoretical papers

Four review and theoretical papers about CAD systems and trends in the last decade were included in this SR.

Shiraishi et al. [4] conducted a survey on the use of ROC curves in medical imaging analyses from studies published in Radiology Journal. The researchers analyzed 295 studies published between 1997 and 2006 containing the phrase, "receiver operating characteristic". Approximately 79% of the studies reported findings based on subjective diagnoses or objective measurements, while 14.6% did not include human observers. Most works of the latter evaluated CAD systems.

Pietka et al. [94] presented and discussed the participation of health professionals and technicians in various stages of the life cycle (i.e., design, assessment and implementation) of CAD systems. The researchers used their own CAD systems to examine how consecutive stages were developed by the multidisciplinary team.

Zhang et al. [95] presented a review about recent advances in breast tissue classification technologies of CAD systems for breast cancer. The researchers did not present the review methodology; instead, they discussed three classification approaches (texture feature analysis, statistical modeling and machine learning) and compared results obtained from analyzed studies. According to the researchers, machine learning is the most feasible approach to developing universal CAD systems.

Korotkov and Garcia [93] presented a review about computerized analyses of pigmented skin lesions in microscopic (dermatoscopic) and macroscopic (clinical) images. The researchers presented an extensive background about applied field concepts and described features and methodologies used in the analyzed studies.

### Trends and opportunities

From the studies included in this review, the most explored subjects were breast and lung cancers. However, we believe other diseases diagnoses are as important, especially those related to the heart and the brain, which have caused many deaths worldwide. CAD schemes for aiding early disease diagnoses in these areas could potentially improve treatment therapies and thereby effect higher rates of positive outcomes.

Several types of images have been used in the reviewed studies, with X-ray images being the most frequent. However, most CAD systems only considered one type of image, perhaps due to the difficulty in simultaneously evaluating multiple images with diverse formats and characteristics. The evaluation of the combination of different image types may be an interesting subject to explore.

All analyzed studies developed techniques for detecting, segmenting or classifying structures to compose CAD systems. No study proposed any other procedure; all works used traditional approaches to evaluate their results. The limitations of these approaches and the non-standardization of the databases used in evaluations are further discussed in the following section.

Traditional metrics (e.g., ROC and FROC curves) are based on TP, TN, FP and FN results; thus, they depend on prior knowledge of case characteristics used to test CAD systems. For example, to identify actual lesions from medical images, the actual details and characteristics of structures of lesions in an image must be known beforehand. Therefore, there is a chance for normal, benign structures to be mistakenly considered as lesions.

Typically, in this type of evaluation, physician participation is mandatory every time the CAD presents a new technique or approach. The "visual" analyses of each case and the comparison of CAD results against traditional diagnoses must be performed by an experienced medical professional (e.g., a physician or radiologist). Therefore, the testing and evaluation of CAD systems using such metrics is resource-intensive. Whenever any part of the system is modified, subsequent results validation is required. An additional complication is that a physician evaluation can vary, depending on factors such as experience, fatigue, and time availability, as cited by Aziz et al. [35], Barlow et al. [36], and Pindborg et al. [37]. Appropriate method for evaluating these systems have yet to be determined and can constitute new opportunities for exploration. Consequently, more reliable systems may be able to decrease variations and improve the quality of diagnoses.

We did not encounter any articles mentioning the use of software engineering techniques, such as software testing, in conjunction with other evaluation approaches. While traditional techniques are not ideal subjects for new publications, it is well known that in specific domains, testing activities require adapted or new techniques. In particular, complexities of input and output domains of image processing software might pose a real challenge for software engineers. Selecting robust test cases from a large, complex and diverse data set is not a trivial task and has not been adequately studied. In addition, using software testing metrics with traditional approaches for CAD evaluations has not yet been explored. However, the present study considers only scientific and academic works; commercial products were out of our scope. Thus, we only considered data related to the studied articles.

We suggest and discuss some research approaches within this scope by using Content-Based Image Retrieval (CBIR) concepts to evaluate CAD outputs and test criteria definitions and applications. This permits the identification of errors in the software and computational testing tools. As a result, the CAD evaluation becomes more objective and effective.

In recent years, CBIR techniques have been explored to aid in image retrieval and to assist the physician in composing a diagnosis based on data from similar cases. CBIR systems use features related to color, shape, texture and distance to calculate the similarity between images and their features. We believe concepts from CBIR could be extended to compose more objective approaches to evaluate CAD systems. In the suggested CBIR approach, the expert is required to determine one correct solution (i.e., a model image), and extractors automatically verify whether the answer produced by the image processing program has similar characteristics as that of the model image. Thus, our approach avoids a reliance on potentially biased diagnoses for verification. From a software engineering standpoint, this is an important improvement because testing processes are resource-intensive and are often required during software development and maintenance.

A few standardized databases were used in the reviewed studies. However, none of these databases were complete, i.e., a few databases did not have all structure types, others presented hard-to-process image formats, and still others did not provide enough information for testing techniques. Thus, the creation of image databases to serve as reliable benchmarks, with standardized image formats, mechanisms to select cases of interest and data that allow performance comparisons of different CADs requires further study.

One of our future goals is to define a methodology that reduces the complexity and repetition required to assess CAD systems. To this end, we intend to use the concept of CBIR for a comparison of graphical outputs (i.e., images) of CAD systems while considering their respective outputs as correct [38]. The existence of public databases favors this approach because such databases often contain expert diagnoses that are associated with the images.

This paper presented the results of a systematic review that allowed the survey and analysis of the state of the art regarding the design, development and evaluation of systems for computer-aided diagnoses. We cataloged 98 CAD systems designed to automate various tasks to aid in disease diagnoses. These systems are described in the studies retrieved from five databases of published scientific papers.

Several groups worldwide have developed CAD systems. Thus, there are vast numbers of published papers analyzing diseases and various modalities of medical imaging, as presented here.

A non-systematic review may not fully explore the state of the art and can even require rework due to the lack of a detailed record on the performance of the review. In this context, the performance of a systematic review, specifically for CAD systems, provides both a general overview and specific details for interested groups. Furthermore, regular updates to the review and the ease of auditing presented results provide increased productivity in the bibliographic research.

The results confirm traditional metrics, which are based on true positives, true negatives, false positives and false negatives as the primary means to assess and compare the performance of CAD systems. ROC and FROC curves use methods derived from these metrics to assist in the assessment of system behaviors, given variations in their parameters.

However, these metrics and methods require the repetitive and exhausting participation of physicians and radiologists for verifying the accuracy of each version of a CAD system. While such participation is essential, the authors of this paper intend to focus on automating these verification tasks by using CBIR to compare the graphical output (i.e., images) of CAD systems with their respective database. In this future work, we will aim to determine an objective methodology for assessing CAD systems.

This study contributed an extensive literature review of the past six years on the state of the art of the design, development and assessment of CAD systems. We presented tasks of interest, relevant public databases of medical images, the main metrics and assessment methods, and a general analysis over the entire art.

## Acknowledgements

This work was supported by the São Paulo Research Foundation (Fapesp) [grant numbers 2010/15691-0, 2010/09806-0, 2010/01496-1]; the National Council for Scientific and Technological Development (CNPq) [grant numbers 559931/2010-7, 559915/2010-1]; and the National Institute of Science and Technology-Medicine Assisted by Scientific Computing (INCT-MACC).

## References

1.  Doi, K. (2007). Computer-aided diagnosis in medical imaging: historical review, current status and future potential. *Computerized Medical Imaging and Graphics, 31*(4-5), 198-211.
2.  van Ginneken, B., Armato III, S. G., Hoop, B., Amelsvoort-van de Vorst, S., Duindam, T., Niemeijer, M., ... & Prokop, M. (2010). Comparing and combining algorithms for computer-aided detection of pulmonary nodules in computed tomography scans: the ANODE09 study. *Medical Image Analysis, 14*(6), 707-722.
3.  Doi, K. (2006). Diagnostic imaging over the last 50 years: research and development in medical imaging science and technology. *Physics in Medicine and Biology, 51*(13), R5-27.
4.  Shiraishi, J., Pesce, L. L., Metz, C. E., & Doi, K. (2009). Experimental design and data analysis in receiver operating characteristic studies: lessons learned from reports in radiology from 1997 to 2006. *Radiology, 253*(3), 822-830.
5.  Kitchenham, B. A. (2004). *Procedures for performing systematic reviews*. Keele: Department of Computer Science, Keele University.
6.  Biolchini, J. C. A., Mian, P. G., Natali, A. C. C., Conte, T. U., & Travassos, G. H. (2007). Scientific research ontology to support systematic review in software engineering. *Advanced Engineering Informatics, 21*(2), 133-151.
7.  Liberati, A., Altman, D. G., Tetzlaff, J., Mulrow, C., Gotzsche, P. C., Ioannidis, J. P. A., ... & Moher, D. (2009). The PRISMA statement for reporting systematic reviews and meta-analyses of studies that evaluate health care interventions: explanation and elaboration. *PLoS Medicine, 6*(7), e1000100.
8.  Giger, M. L. (1999). Overview of computer-aided diagnosis in breast imaging. In K. Doi, H. MacMahon, M. L. Giger, & K. R. Hoffmann (Eds.), *Computer-aided diagnosis in medical imaging* (pp. 167-176). Amsterdam: Elsevier.
9.  Giannakopoulou, G., Spyrou, G. M., Antaraki, A., Andreadis, I., Koulocheri, D., Zagouri, F., ... & Zografos, G. C. (2010). Downgrading BIRADS 3 to BIRADS 2 category using a computer-aided microcalcification analysis and risk assessment system for early breast cancer. *Computers in Biology and Medicine, 40*(11-12), 853-859.
10. Jasmine, J. S. L., Govardhan, A., & Baskaran, S. (2009). Microcalcification detection in digital mammograms based on wavelet analysis and neural networks. In *Proceedings of the International Conference on Control, Automation, Communication and Energy Conservation* (pp. 1-6). IEEE.
11. Osman, M. E., Wahed, M. A., Mohamed, A. S., & Kadah, Y. M. (2009). Computer aided diagnosis system for classification of microcalcifications in digital mammograms. In *Proceedings of the National Radio Science Conference* (pp. 1-6). IEEE.
12. Verma, B. (2009). Impact of multiple clusters on neural classification of ROIs in digital mammograms. In *Proceedings of the International Joint Conference on Neural Networks* (pp. 2532-2535). IEEE.
13. Lee, H. W., Liu, B. D., Hung, K. C., Lei, S. F., Wang, P. C., & Yang, T. L. (2009). Breast tumor classification of ultrasound images using wavelet-based channel energy and imageJ. *IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Signal Processing, 3*(1), 81-93.
14. Shen, W. C., Chang, R. F., & Moon, W. K. (2007). Computer aided classification system for breast ultrasound based on breast imaging reporting and data system (BI-RADS). *Ultrasound in Medicine & Biology, 33*(11), 1688-1698.
15. Huang, W., Li, H., Chan, K., Lim, J., Liu, J., & Wong, T. (2009). A computer-aided diagnosis system of nuclear cataract via ranking. In G. Z. Yang, D. Hawkes, D. Rueckert, A. Noble, & C. Taylor (Eds.), *Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention: MICCAI 2009* (pp. 803-810). Heidelberg: Springer.
16. Ashwin, S., Kumar, S. A., Ramesh, J., & Gunavathi, K. (2012). Efficient and reliable lung nodule detection using a neural network based computer aided diagnosis system. In *Proceedings of the International Conference on Emerging Trends in Electrical Engineering and Energy Management* (pp. 135-142). IEEE.
17. Korfiatis, P., Skiadopoulos, S., Sakellaropoulos, P., Kalogeropoulou, C., & Costaridou, L. (2007). Automated 3D segmentation of lung fields in thin slice CT exploiting wavelet preprocessing. In W. G. Kropatsch, M. Kampel, & A. Hanbury (Eds.), *Computer analysis of images and patterns* (pp. 237-244). Heidelberg: Springer.
18. Liu, H., Hu, H., Xu, X., & Song, E. (2012). Automatic left ventricle segmentation in cardiac MRI Using topological stable-state thresholding and region restricted dynamic programming. *Academic Radiology, 19*(6), 723-731.
19. Pietka, E., Kawa, J., Badura, P., & Spinczyk, D. (2010). Open architecture computer-aided diagnosis system. *Expert Systems, 27*(1), 17-39.
20. Suganthi, M., & Madheswaran, M. (2010). An enhanced decision support system for breast tumor identification in screening mammograms using combined classifier. In *Proceedings of the International Conference and Workshop on Emerging Trends in Technology* (pp. 786-791). ACM.
21. Beuren, A. T., Janasieivicz, R., Pinheiro, G., Grando, N., & Facon, J. (2012). Skin melanoma segmentation by morphological approach. In *Proceedings of the International Conference on Advances in Computing, Communications and Informatics* (pp. 972-978). ACM.
22. Lerdsinmongkol, J., Chaisaowong, K., Roongruangsorakarn, S., Kraus, T., & Aach, T. (2011). Efficient application of 3D morphological operations in the framework of a computer-assisted diagnosis system. In *Proceedings of the 9th International Conference on Signal Processing* (pp. 857-860). IEEE.
23. Li, Y. H., Zhang, L., Hu, Q. M., Li, H. W., Jia, F. C., & Wu, J. H. (2012). Automatic subarachnoid space segmentation and hemorrhage detection in clinical head CT scans. *International Journal of Computer Assisted Radiology and Surgery, 7*(4), 507-516.
24. Usha, B. S., & Sandya, S. (2013). Measurement of ovarian size and shape parameters. In *Proceedings of the Annual IEEE India Conference* (pp. 1-6). IEEE.
25. Volpi, S. L., Antonelli, M., Lazzerini, B., Marcelloni, F., & Stefanescu, D. C. (2009). Segmentation and reconstruction of the lung and the mediastinum volumes in CT images. In *Proceedings of the 2nd International Symposium on Applied Sciences in Biomedical and Communication Technologies* (pp. 1-6). IEEE.
26. Wittenberg, T., Wagner, F., & Gryanik, A. (2012). Towards a computer assisted diagnosis system for digital breast tomosynthesis. *Biomedical Engineering/Biomedizinische Technik, 57*(SI-1), 223-226.
27. Zheng, B., Pu, J., Park, S. C., Zuley, M., & Gur, D. (2008). Assessment of the relationship between lesion segmentation accuracy and computer-aided diagnosis scheme performance. In M. L. Giger & N. Karssemeijer (Eds.), *Medical Imaging 2008: computer-aided diagnosis*. SPIE.
28. Haindl, M., Mikeš, S., & Scarpa, G. (2007). Unsupervised detection of mammogram regions of interest. In B. Apolloni, R. J. Howlett, & L. Jain (Eds.), *Knowledge-based intelligent information and engineering systems* (pp. 33-40). Heidelberg: Springer.
29. Tan, N. M., Liu, J., Wong, D. W. K., Yin, F., Lim, J. H., & Wong, T. Y. (2010). Mixture model-based approach for optic cup segmentation. In *Proceedings of the Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society* (pp. 4817-4820). IEEE.
30. Endo, M., Aramaki, T., Asakura, K., Moriguchi, M., Akimaru, M., Osawa, A., ... & Yamaguchi, K. (2012). Content-based image-retrieval system in chest computed tomography for a solitary pulmonary nodule: method and preliminary experiments. *International Journal of Computer Assisted Radiology and Surgery, 7*(2), 331-338.
31. Garnavi, R., Aldeen, M., & Celebi, M. E. (2011). Weighted performance index for objective evaluation of border detection methods in dermoscopy images. *Skin Research and Technology, 17*(1), 35-44.
32. Wagner, R. F., Metz, C. E., & Campbell, G. (2007). Assessment of medical imaging systems and computer aids: a tutorial review. *Academic Radiology, 14*(6), 723-748.
33. Metz, C. E. (1999). Evaluation of CAD methods. In K. Doi, H. MacMahon, M. L. Giger, & K. R. Hoffmann (Eds.), *Computer-aided diagnosis in medical imaging* (pp. 543-554). Amsterdam: Elsevier.
34. Nishikawa, R. M. (2007). Current status and future directions of computer-aided diagnosis in mammography. *Computerized Medical Imaging and Graphics, 31*(4-5), 224-235.
35. Aziz, Z. A., Wells, A. U., Hansell, D. M., Bain, G. A., Copley, S. J., Desai, S. R., ... & Robertson, R. J. H. (2004). HRCT diagnosis of diffuse parenchymal lung disease: inter-observer variation. *Thorax, 59*(6), 506-511.
36. Barlow, W. E., Chi, C., Carney, P. A., Taplin, S. H., D'Orsi, C., Cutter, G., ... & Elmore, J. G. (2004). Accuracy of screening mammography Interpretation by characteristics of radiologists. *Journal of the National Cancer Institute, 96*(24), 1840-1850.
37. Pindborg, J. J., Reibel, J., & Holmstrup, P. (1985). Subjectivity in evaluating oral epithelial dysplasia, carcinoma in situ and initial carcinoma. *Journal of Oral Pathology & Medicine, 14*(9), 698-708.
38. Delamaro, M. E., Nunes, F. L. S., & Oliveira, R. A. P. (2013). Using concepts of content-based image retrieval to implement graphical testing oracles. *Software Testing, Verification and Reliability, 23*(3), 171-198.
39. Heath, M., Bowyer, K., Kopans, D., Moore, R., & Kegelmeyer, W. P. (2001). The digital database for screening mammography. In *Proceedings of the Fifth International Workshop on Digital Mammography* (pp. 212-218). Medical Physics Publishing.
40. Suckling, J., Parker, J., Dance, D. R., Astley, S., Hutt, I., Boggis, C., ... & Savage, J. (1994). The Mammographic Image Analysis Society digital mammogram database. In A. G. Gale, S. M. Astley, D. R. Dance, & A. Y. Cairns (Eds.), *Proceedings of the Second International Workshop on Digital Mammography*. Amsterdam: Excerta Medica.
41. Armato III, S. G., McLennan, G., Bidaut, L., McNitt-Gray, M. F., Meyer, C. R., Reeves, A. P., ... & Clarke, L. P. (2011). The Lung Image Database Consortium (LIDC) and Image Database Resource Initiative (IDRI): a completed reference database of lung nodules on CT scans. *Medical Physics, 38*(2), 915-931.
42. Shiraishi, J., Katsuragawa, S., Ikezoe, J., Matsumoto, T., Kobayashi, T., Komatsu Ki, ... & Doi, K. (2000). Development of a digital image database for chest radiographs with and without a lung nodule: receiver operating characteristic analysis of radiologists' detection of pulmonary nodules. *American Journal of Roentgenology, 174*(1), 71-74.
43. Messidor. (2014). *Messidor: digital retinal images*. Retrieved from http://messidor.crihan.fr/download-en.php
44. Staal, J., Abramoff, M. D., Niemeijer, M., Viergever, M. A., & Van Ginneken, B. (2004). Ridge-based vessel segmentation in color images of the retina. *IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging, 23*(4), 501-509.
45. McCormick, B., & Goldbaum, M. (1975). STARE: structured analysis of the retina. Image processing of TV fundus image. In *Proceedings of the USA-Japan Workshop on Image Processing*. Jet Propulsion Laboratory.
46. Mueller, S. G., Weiner, M. W., Thal, L. J., Petersen, R. C., Jack, C. R., Jagust, W., ... & Beckett, L. (2005). Ways toward an early diagnosis in Alzheimer's disease: the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI). *Alzheimer's Dement, 1*(1), 55-66.
47. Haindl, M., & Mikeš, S. (2008). Texture segmentation benchmark. In *Proceedings of the 19th International Conference on Pattern Recognition* (pp. 1-4). IEEE.
48. Gruszauskas, N. P., Drukker, K., Giger, M. L., Sennett, C. A., & Pesce, L. L. (2008). Performance of breast ultrasound computer-aided diagnosis: dependence on image selection. *Academic Radiology, 15*(10), 1234-1245.
49. Barhoumi, W., Dhahbi, S., & Zagrouba, E. (2007). A collaborative system for pigmented skin lesions malignancy tracking. In *Proceedings of the IEEE International Workshop on Imaging Systems and Techniques* (pp. 1-6). IEEE.
50. Geetha, K., Thanushkodi, K., & Kumar, A. K. (2008). New particle swarm optimization for feature selection and classification of microcalcifications in mammograms. In *Proceedings of the International Conference on Signal Processing, Communications and Networking* (pp. 458-463). IEEE.
51. Wu, Z. Q., Jiang, J., Peng, Y. H., & Gulsrud, T. O. (2006). A filter-based approach towards automatic detection of microcalcification. In S. Astley, M. Brady, C. Rose, & R. Zwiggelaar (Eds.), *Digital mammography* (pp. 424-432). Heidelberg: Springer.
52. López, Y., Novoa, A., Guevara, M. A., Quintana, N., & Silva, A. (2008). Computer aided diagnosis system to detect breast cancer pathological lesions. In J. Ruiz-Shulcloper & W. Kropatsch (Eds.), *Progress in Pattern Recognition, Image Analysis and Applications* (pp. 453-460). Heidelberg: Springer.
53. Ramírez, J., Gorriz, J. M., Chaves, R., Lopez, M., Salas-Gonzalez, D., Alvarez, I., ... & Gómez-Río, M. (2009). SPECT image classification using random forests. *Electronics Letters, 45*(12), 604-605.
54. Bhooshan, N., Giger, M., Lan, L., Li, H., Marquez, A., Shimauchi, A., & Newstead, G. M. (2011). Combined use of T-2-weighted MRI and T-1-weighted dynamic contrast-enhanced MRI in the automated Analysis of breast lesions. *Magnetic Resonance in Medicine, 66*(2), 555-563.
55. Retter, F., Plant, C., Burgeth, B., Botella, G., Schlossbauer, T., & Meyer-Baese, A. (2013). Computer-aided diagnosis for diagnostically challenging breast lesions in DCE-MRI based on image registration and integration of morphologic and dynamic characteristics. *EURASIP Journal on Advances in Signal Processing, 2013*, 157.
56. Tolouee, A., Moghaddam, H. A., Forouzanfar, M., Gity, M., & Garnavi, R. (2011). Image based diagnostic aid system for interstitial lung diseases. *Expert Systems With Applications, 38*(6), 7755-7765.
57. Grana, M., Termenon, M., Savio, A., Gonzalez-Pinto, A., Echeveste, J., Perez, J. M., & Besga, A. (2011). Computer aided diagnosis system for alzheimer disease using brain diffusion tensor imaging features selected by Pearson's correlation. *Neuroscience Letters, 502*(3), 225-229.
58. Martinez-Murcia, F. J., Gorriz, J. M., Ramirez, J., Moreno-Caballero, M., Gomez-Rio, M., & Ini, P. P. M. (2014). Parametrization of textural patterns in I-123-ioflupane imaging for the automatic detection of Parkinsonism. *Medical Physics, 41*(1).
59. Mironică, I., Vertan, C., & Gheorghe, D. C. (2011). Automatic pediatric otitis detection by classification of global image features. In *Proceedings of the E-Health and Bioengineering Conference* (pp. 1-4). IEEE.
60. Miyaki, R., Yoshida, S., Tanaka, S., Kominami, Y., Sanomura, Y., Matsuo, T., ... & Chayama, K. (2013). Quantitative identification of mucosal gastric cancer under magnifying endoscopy with flexible spectral imaging color enhancement. *Journal of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, 28*(5), 841-847.
61. Segovia, F., Gorriz, J. M., Ramirez, J., Salas-Gonzalez, D., Alvarez, I., Lopez, M., ... & Gómez-Río, M. (2012). A comparative study of feature extraction methods for the diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease using the ADNI database. *Neurocomputing, 75*(1), 64-71.
62. Wang, D., Shi, L., & Heng, P. A. (2009). Automatic detection of breast cancers in mammograms using structured support vector machines. *Neurocomputing, 72*(13), 3296-3302.
63. Shilaskar, S., & Ghatol, A. (2013). Feature selection for medical diagnosis: evaluation for cardiovascular diseases. *Expert Systems with Applications, 40*(10), 4146-4153.
64. Al-Absi, H. R. H., Samir, B. B., Shaban, K. B., & Sulaiman, S. (2012). Computer aided diagnosis system based on machine learning techniques for lung cancer. In *Proceedings of the 2012 International Conference on Computer Information Science* (pp. 295-300). IEEE.
65. Sanchez, C. I., Niemeijer, M., Dumitrescu, A. V., Suttorp-Schulten, M. S. A., Abramoff, M. D., & Van Ginneken, B. (2011). Evaluation of a computer-aided diagnosis system for diabetic retinopathy screening on public data. *Investigative Ophthalmology Visual Science, 52*(7), 4866-4871.
66. Hatanaka, Y., Mizukami, A., Muramatsu, C., Hara, T., & Fujita, H. (2011). Automated lesion detection in retinal images. In *Proceedings of the 4th International Symposium on Applied Sciences in Biomedical and Communication Technologies* (pp. 91:1-5). ACM.
67. Li, B., Qi, L., Meng, M. Q. H., & Fan, Y. (2009). Using ensemble classifier for small bowel ulcer detection in wireless capsule endoscopy images. In *Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Biomimetics* (pp. 2326-2331). IEEE.
68. Kumar, S. S., Moni, R. S., & Rajeesh, J. (2011). Contourlet transform based computer-aided diagnosis system for liver tumors on computed tomography images. In *Proceedings of the International Conference on Signal Processing, Communication, Computing and Networking Technologies* (pp. 217-222). IEEE.
69. Itai, Y., Kim, H., Ishikawa, S., Katsuragawa, S., & Doi, K. (2009). Reduction of FPs for lung nodules in MDCT by use of temporal subtraction with voxel-matching technique. In M. Koppen, N. Kasabov, & G. Coghill (Eds.), *Advances in Neuro-Information Processing* (pp. 504-512). Heidelberg: Springer.
70. Sasaki, T., Kinoshita, K., Kishida, S., Hirata, Y., & Yamada, S. (2010). Effect of pre-processing on performance of a neural network with one-dimensional sampling from X-ray images of chest. In *Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Natural Computation* (pp. 257-261). IEEE.
71. Bevilacqua, V. (2013). Three-dimensional virtual colonoscopy for automatic polyps detection by artificial neural network approach: new tests on an enlarged cohort of polyps. *Neurocomputing, 116*, 62-75.
72. García-Orellana, C. J., Gallardo-Caballero, R., Gonzalez-Velasco, H. M., García-Manso, A., & Macias-Macias, M. (2008). Study of a mammographic CAD performance dependence on the considered mammogram set. In *Proceedings of the 30th Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society* (pp. 4776-4779). IEEE.
73. López, M., Ramírez, J., Górriz, J. M., Álvarez, I., Salas-Gonzalez, D., Segovia, F., ... & Gómez-Río, M. (2011). Principal component analysis-based techniques and supervised classification schemes for the early detection of Alzheimer's disease. *Neurocomputing, 74*(8), 1260-1271.
74. Filipczuk, P., Kowal, M., & Obuchowicz, A. (2013). Multi-label fast marching and seeded watershed segmentation methods for diagnosis of breast cancer cytology. In *Proceedings of the 35th Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society* (pp. 7368-7371). IEEE.
75. Gedik, N., & Atasoy, A. (2013). A computer-aided diagnosis system for breast cancer detection by using a curvelet transform. *Turkish Journal of Electrical Engineering & Computer Sciences, 21*(4), 1002-1014.
76. Gopinath, B., & Shanthi, N. (2013). Computer-aided diagnosis system for classifying benign and malignant thyroid nodules in multi-stained FNAB cytological images. *Australasian Physical & Engineering Sciences In Medicine, 36*(2), 219-230.
77. Muramatsu, C., Matsumoto, T., Hayashi, T., Hara, T., Katsumata, A., Zhou, X., ... & Fujita, H. (2013). Automated measurement of mandibular cortical width on dental panoramic radiographs. *International Journal of Computer Assisted Radiology and Surgery, 8*(6), 877-885.
78. Nava, R., Escalante-Ramirez, B., Cristobal, G., & Estepar, R. S. J. (2014). Extended Gabor approach applied to classification of emphysematous patterns in computed tomography. *Medical & Biological Engineering & Computing, 52*(4), 393-403.
79. Odeh, S., Ros, E., Rojas, I., & Palomares, J. (2006). Skin lesion diagnosis using fluorescence images. In A. Campilho & M. Kamel (Eds.), *Image analysis and recognition* (pp. 648-659). Heidelberg: Springer.
80. Ramos, R. P., Nascimento, M. Z., & Pereira, D. C. (2012). Texture extraction: an evaluation of ridgelet, wavelet and co-occurrence based methods applied to mammograms. *Expert Systems with Applications, 39*(12), 11036-11047.
81. Raja, K. B., Madheswaran, M., & Thyagarajah, K. (2010). Texture pattern analysis of kidney tissues for disorder identification and classification using dominant Gabor wavelet. *Machine Vision and Applications, 21*(3), 287-300.
82. Verikas, A., Gelzinis, A., Bacauskiene, M., & Uloza, V. (2006). Towards a computer-aided diagnosis system for vocal cord diseases. *Artificial Intelligence in Medicine, 36*(1), 71-84.
83. Streba, C. T., Ionescu, M., Gheonea, D. I., Sandulescu, L., Ciurea, T., Saftoiu, A., ... & Rogoveanu, I. (2012). Contrast-enhanced ultrasonography parameters in neural network diagnosis of liver tumors. *World Journal of Gastroenterology, 18*(32), 4427-4434.
84. Raja, K. B., Madheswaran, M., & Thyagarajah, K. (2007). Analysis of ultrasound kidney images using content descriptive multiple features for disorder identification and ANN based classification. In *Proceedings of the International Conference on Computing: Theory and Applications* (pp. 382-388). IEEE.
85. Ampeliotis, D., Antonakoudi, A., Berberidis, K., & Psarakis, E. Z. (2007). Computer aided detection of prostate cancer using fused information from dynamic contrast enhanced and morphological magnetic resonance images. In *Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Signal Processing and Communications* (pp. 888-891). IEEE.
86. Garnavi, R., Aldeen, M., & Bailey, J. (2012). Computer-aided diagnosis of melanoma using border- and wavelet-based texture analysis. *IEEE Transactions on Information Technology in Biomedicine, 16*(6), 1239-1252.
87. Gruszauskas, N. P., Drukker, K., Giger, M. L., Chang, R. F., Sennett, C. A., Moon, W. K., & Pesce, L. L. (2009). Breast US computer-aided diagnosis system: robustness across urban populations in South Korea and the United States. *Radiology, 253*(3), 661-671.
88. Tanner, C., Hawkes, D. J., Khazen, M., Kessar, P., & Leach, M. O. (2006). Does registration improve the performance of a computer aided diagnosis system for dynamic contrast-enhanced MR mammography? In *Proceedings of the IEEE International Symposium on Biomedical Imaging: Nano to Macro* (pp. 466-469). IEEE.
89. Schilham, A. M. R., Van Ginneken, B., & Loog, M. (2006). A computer-aided diagnosis system for detection of lung nodules in chest radiographs with an evaluation on a public database. *Medical Image Analysis, 10*(2), 247-258.
90. Chan, T. (2010). Clinical usage considerations in the development and evaluation of a computer aided diagnosis system for acute intracranial hemorrhage on brain CT. In D. Zhang & M. Sonka (Eds.), *Medical Biometrics* (pp. 268-275). Heidelberg: Springer.
91. He, W., Denton, E. R. E., Stafford, K., & Zwiggelaar, R. (2011). Mammographic image segmentation and risk classification based on mammographic parenchymal patterns and geometric moments. *Biomedical Signal Processing and Control, 6*(3), 321-329.
92. Chang, T. C., Lee, J. D., Huang, C. H., Wu, T., Chen, C. J., & Wu, S. J. (2006). The diagnostic application of brain image processing and analysis system for ischemic stroke. In G. Bebis, R. Boyle, B. Parvin, D. Koracin, P. Remagnino, A. Nefian, ... & J. Molineros (Eds.), *Advances in visual computing. Part II* (pp. 31-38). Heidelberg: Springer.
93. Korotkov, K., & Garcia, R. (2012). Computerized analysis of pigmented skin lesions: a review. *Artificial Intelligence in Medicine, 56*(2), 69-90.
94. Pietka, E., Kawa, J., Spinczyk, D., Badura, P., Wiecławek, W., Czajkowska, J., & Rudzki, M. (2011). Role of radiologists in CAD life-cycle. *Role of radiologists in CAD life-cycle, 78*(2), 225-233.
95. Zhang, G., Wang, W., Moon, J., Pack, J. K., & Jeon, S. I. (2011). A review of breast tissue classification in mammograms. In *Proceedings of the ACM Symposium on Research in Applied Computation* (pp. 232-237). ACM.
96. Jiménez, S., Alemany, P., Fondón, I., Foncubierta, A., Acha, B., & Serrano, C. (2010). Detección automática de vasos en retinografías. *Archivos de la Sociedad Española de Oftalmología, 85*(3), 103-109.
97. Huang, J. Y., Kao, P. F., & Chen, Y. S. (2007). A set of image processing algorithms for computer-aided diagnosis in nuclear medicine whole body bone scan images. *IEEE Transactions on Nuclear Science, 54*(3), 514-522.
98. Song, E., Xu, S., Xu, X., Zeng, J., Lan, Y., Zhang, S., & Hung, C. C. (2010). Hybrid segmentation of mass in mammograms using template matching and dynamic programming. *Academic Radiology, 17*(11), 1414-1424.
99. Huang, S. F., Chaoa, H. Y., Hsu, C. C., Yang, S. F., & Kao, P. F. (2009). A computer-aided diagnosis system for whole body bone scan using single photon emission computed tomography. In *Proceedings of the IEEE International Symposium on Biomedical Imaging: From Nano to Macro* (pp. 542-545). IEEE.
100. Xiao, F., Liao, C. C., Huang, K. C., Chiang, I. J., & Wong, J. M. (2010). Automated assessment of midline shift in head injury patients. *Clinical Neurology and Neurosurgery, 112*(9), 785-790.
101. Charbonnier, J. P., Smit, E. J., Viergever, M. A., Velthuis, B. K., & Vos, P. C. (2013). Computer-aided diagnosis of acute ischemic stroke based on cerebral hypoperfusion using 4D CT angiography. In C. L. Novak & S. Aylward (Eds.), *Medical imaging 2013: Computer-Aided Diagnosis*. SPIE.
102. Charisis, V. S., Katsimerou, C., Hadjileontiadis, L. J., Liatsos, C. N., & Sergiadis, G. D. (2013). Computer-aided capsule endoscopy images evaluation based on color rotation and texture features: an educational tool to physicians. In *Proceedings of the 26th IEEE International Symposium on Computer-Based Medical Systems* (pp. 203-208). IEEE.
103. David, J., Krishnan, R., & Sukesh Kumar, A. (2008). Neural network based retinal image analysis. In *Proceedings of the Congress on Image and Signal Processing* (pp. 49-53). IEEE.
104. Elizabeth, D. S., Nehemiah, H. K., Raj, C. S. R., & Kannan, A. (2012). A novel segmentation approach for improving diagnostic accuracy of CAD systems for detecting lung cancer from chest computed tomography images. *ACM Journal of Data and Information Quality, 3*(2), 4:1-4:16.
105. Gomathi, M., & Thangaraj, P. (2010). Automated CAD for detection of lung nodule using CT scans. In *Proceedings of the Third Annual ACM Bangalore Conference* (pp. 25:1-4). ACM.
106. Hebert, D., Desir, C., Petitjean, C., Heutte, L., & Thiberville, L. (2012). Detection of pathological condition in distal lung images. In *Proceedings of the 9th IEEE International Symposium on Biomedical Imaging* (pp. 1603-1606). IEEE.
107. Kovacs, T., Cattin, P., Alkadhi, H., Wildermuth, S., & Szekely, G. (2006). Automatic segmentation of the aortic dissection membrane from 3D CTA images. In G. Yang, T. Jiang, D. Shen, L. Gu, & J. Yang (Eds.), *Medical imaging and augmented reality* (pp. 317-324). Heidelberg: Springer.
108. Kuang, W., & Ye, W. (2008). A kernel-modified SVM based computer-aided diagnosis system in initial caries. In *Proceedings of the Second International Symposium on Intelligent Information Technology Application* (pp. 207-211). IEEE.
109. Lartizien, C., Rogez, M., Niaf, E., & Ricard, F. (2014). Computer aided staging of lymphoma patients with FDG PET/CT imaging based on textural information. *IEEE Journal of Biomedical and Health Informatics, 18*(3), 946-955.
110. Liu, P., Wang, S., Turkbey, B., Grant, K., Pinto, P., Choyke, P., ... & Summers, R. M. (2013). A prostate cancer computer-aided diagnosis system using multimodal magnetic resonance imaging and targeted biopsy labels. In C. Novak & S. Aylward (Eds.), *Medical Imaging 2013: Computer-Aided Diagnosis*. SPIE.
111. Markkongkeaw, A., Phinyomark, A., Boonyapihat, P., & Phukpattaranont, P. (2013). Preliminary results of breast cancer cell classifying based on gray-level co-occurrence matrix. In *Proceedings of the 6th Biomedical Engineering International Conference* (pp. 1-4). IEEE.
112. Mumcuoglu, E. U., Bozkurt, F. M., Aslan, M., Sener, E., & Ugur, O. (2011). Computerized scar detection on renal cortical scintigraphy images. *Nuclear Medicine Communications, 32*(11), 1070-1078.
113. Nagata, R., Kawaguchi, T., & Miyake, H. (2013). A computer-aided diagnosis system for lung nodule detection in chest radiographs using a two-stage classification method based on radial gradient and template matching. In *Proceedings of the 6th International Conference on Biomedical Engineering and Informatics* (pp. 80-85). IEEE.
114. Roberts, M. G., Pacheco, E. M. B., Mohankumar, R., Cootes, T. F., & Adams, J. E. (2010). Detection of vertebral fractures in DXA VFA images using statistical models of appearance and a semi-automatic segmentation. *Osteoporosis International, 21*(12), 2037-2046.
115. Sato, K., Kadowaki, S., Madokoro, H., Ito, M., & Inugami, A. (2011). Unsupervised segmentation for MR brain images. In *Proceedings of the 4th International Symposium on Applied Sciences in Biomedical and Communication Technologies* (pp. 44:1-5). ACM.
116. Sulaiman, S. N., Ahmad, K. A., Baharudin, R., Ahmad, A., Harron, N. A., Saod, A. H. M., ... & Yusoff, I. A. (2012). Performance of Hybrid Radial Basis Function network: adaptive Fuzzy K-Means versus Moving k-Means clustering as centre positioning algorithms on cervical cell precancerous stage classification. In *Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Control System, Computing and Engineering* (pp. 607-611). IEEE.
117. Tahmasbi, A., Saki, F., & Shokouhi, S. B. (2011). CWLA: a novel cognitive classifier for breast mass diagnosis. In *Proceedings of the 18th Iranian Conference of Biomedical Engineering* (pp. 255-259). IEEE.
118. Vertan, C., Gheorghe, D. C., & Ionescu, B. (2011). Eardrum color content analysis in video-otoscopy images for the diagnosis support of pediatric otitis. In *Proceedings of the 10th International Symposium on Signals, Circuits and Systems* (pp. 1-4). IEEE.
119. Voigt, D., Döllinger, M., Braunschweig, T., Yang, A., Eysholdt, U., & Lohscheller, J. (2010). Classification of functional voice disorders based on phonovibrograms. *Artificial Intelligence in Medicine, 49*(1), 51-59.
120. Wada, S., Matsumoto, T., Murao, K., & Sone, S. (2006). A study on the performance evaluation of computer-aided diagnosis for detecting pulmonary nodules for the various CT reconstruction. In Y. Jiang & M. P. Eckstein (Eds.), *Medical Imaging 2006: image perception, observer performance and technology assessment*. SPIE.