# System Immersion in Virtual Reality-Based Rehabilitation of Motor Function in Older Adults: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis

## Abstract

**Background:** As the elderly population continues to grow, so does the demand for new and innovative solutions to tackle age-related chronic diseases and disabilities. Virtual Reality (VR) has been explored as a novel therapeutic tool for numerous health-related applications. Although findings frequently favor VR, methodological shortcomings prevent clinical recommendations. Moreover, the term "VR" is frequently used ambiguously to describe e.g., video games; the distinction remains vague between immersive VR (IVR) systems and non-immersive VR (NVR). With no distinct demarcation, results of outcome measures are often pooled in meta-analyses, without accounting for the immersiveness of the system.

**Objective:** This systematic review focused on virtual reality-based rehabilitation of older adults (+60) in motor rehabilitation programs. The review aims to retrospectively classify previous studies according to the level of immersion, in order to get an overview of the ambiguity-phenomenon, and to utilize meta-analyses and subgroup analyses to evaluate the comparative efficacy of system immersion in VR-based rehabilitation.

**Methods:** Following PRISMA guidelines, we conducted a systematic search for randomized controlled trials, describing virtual rehabilitation or video games interventions for older adults (+60). Main outcomes were pain, motivation, mobility, balance, and adverse events.

**Results:** We identified 15 studies which included 743 patients. Only three studies utilized IVR. The rest used various NVR-equipment ranging from commercial products (e.g., Nintendo Wii), to bespoke systems that combine tracking devices, software, and displays. A random effects meta-analysis of 10 studies analyzed outcome measures of mobility, balance, and pain. Protocols and dosage varied widely, but outcome results were in favor of immersive and non-immersive interventions, however, dropout rates and adverse events were mostly in favor of the control.

**Conclusions:** We initialize a call-for-action, to distinguish between types of VR-technology and propose a taxonomy of virtual rehabilitation systems based on our findings. Most interventions use NVR-systems, which have demonstrably lower cybersickness-symptoms than IVR-systems. Therefore, adverse events may be under-reported in RCT-studies. An increased demand for IVR-systems highlights this challenge. Care should be given, when applying the results of existing NVR tools to new IVR-technologies. Future studies should provide more detail about their interventions, and future reviews should differentiate between NVR and IVR.

**Keywords:** virtual reality, rehabilitation, immersive displays, older adults, balance, functional mobility, pain, systematic review

## 1. Introduction

By 2050 the world population is projected to reach 9.7 billion people, with older adults ≥65 accounting for approximately one fifth (1.7b) [1]. Increased life-expectancy implies a higher risk of developing various chronic diseases, including cardiovascular diseases, cancer, dementia, osteoarthritis, and stroke [2,3]. Consequently, the diagnosis and treatment of these chronic diseases, which often require special care or hospitalizations, leads to rising expenditures for the healthcare systems around the world [1]. As an approach to prevent these trends, it has been suggested that increased physical activity, as regular exercising provides multiple health benefits, and reduces the risk of obtaining chronic diseases [4–6].

Despite evidence for the health benefits of keeping active, low motivation is often a challenge when seeking to counteract physical inactivity and sedentary lifestyles, through exercise programs [7]. In the context of rehabilitative interventions, outcomes, and recovery often depend on the patient's motivation, leading programs to suffer from low adherence as a consequence. This has been identified as a challenge within different fields of rehabilitation, including pulmonary rehabilitation [8,9], acute stroke [10], and diabetes [11].

Novel technologies such as active video games and virtual reality (VR) technologies, when used appropriately, have the potential to solve some of the challenges with low motivation and adherence. However, implementation into clinical practice has not yet been fully realized. On the other hand, VR has seen a commercial breakthrough within the last 5 years, and steadily increased the technological awareness of consumers and health professionals [12]. Within this field of rehabilitation, the therapeutic effects and value of VR technologies has been evaluated and scrutinized for over two decades, often under the general term of Virtual Rehabilitation [13,14]. Within this highly specialized and diverse field, VR has successfully been applied to rehabilitation for adults with simple phobias [15–18]; Post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) [19–21]; acute and chronic pain treatment [22–28]; post-stroke treatment, brain injury, and various other forms of neurological disorders [29–33].

For motor rehabilitation as an example, advantages with immersive characteristics of VR include how the sense of presence can induce an illusion of virtual body ownership and agency through multisensory feedback [34]. The sensorimotor loops needed for motor rehabilitation can be strengthened through the introduction of a virtual context, to connect relevant cognitive associations to otherwise isolated repetitive motor tasks [14]. This is highly relevant in rehabilitation to reestablish cognitive function processes as motor skills, for instance with stroke patients [35]. For geriatric rehabilitation, virtually augmented exercise is similarly proposed to influence cognitive abilities, for instance in cases including dementia [36].

Nevertheless, VR remains an umbrella term within the field of rehabilitation, used to describe many and vastly different technologies, from "non-immersive" single desktop displays to "immersive" high fidelity motion-sensing input devices and wearable technologies such as head-mounted displays (HMDs) [14]. Hardware aside, variations between software solutions used to study the efficacy of "VR-based" rehabilitation (VRBR) [13] is equally pluralistic. Hence, attempting to define VR, entails a certain ambiguity across a large body of research. However, interventions rarely use immersive VR (IVR)-technology as a facilitator [14].

### 1.1. Current Systematic Reviews

In systematic reviews exploring the efficacy of virtual systems, VR is likewise ambiguously defined, and is frequently specifically defined as the use of commercial non-immersive consoles such as Nintendo Wii [37]. Systematic reviews have explored the use of VR for improving mobility and balance [37–40], physical functioning [41] and in general, to improve health-related domains [42]. However, included articles frequently only describe interventions using NVR; again, most commonly using the Nintendo Wii [40–43]. For example, of the 10 articles included in Amorim et al.'s review [40], 6 use Nintendo Wii console, while the remaining used PlayStation EyeToy (n=1), Xavis measured step system (n=1), or bespoke systems with pressure mats or balance boards (n=2). Likewise, of the 13 articles included in the review by Molina et al. [41], most used Nintendo Wii (Fit) (n=8), Balance Rehabilitation Unit from Medicaa (n=1), or video games or bespoke systems (n=4). Indeed, in a recent review by Karamians et al. [33], exploring the effectiveness of VR and gaming-based interventions for UE post-stroke rehabilitation, only three of the included 38 articles described IVR technology. And while the authors are well aware of the distinguishing features of VR-systems [33], this crucial differentiation may easily be lost, if the review is included in future syntheses. While findings frequently demonstrate a significant improvement in favor of virtual rehabilitation (for example Neri et al. [39], P<0.01), the quality of the evidence is often low with a high risk-of-bias (RoB) [30,37,39,40]. Therefore, the need remains to explore the efficacy of virtual rehabilitation in larger and better controlled studies.

Previous attempts have sought to delimit VR, by simply referring to devices which utilize immersive technology [14,44,45]. However, "immersion" has likewise seen its share of ambiguous usage, and is often confused with related terms, such as presence [46]. VR-systems of high fidelity (e.g., HMDs), are usually referred to as fully immersive VR, or simply immersive VR (IVR). Lower fidelity systems are in these cases mostly referred to as non-immersive VR (NVR). For clarification, we will outline these aspects, before commencing the review's methodology.

### 1.2. Defining Immersion

VR can be described as a computer-generated interactive virtual environment. The defining feature separating VR from traditional media, is arguably VR's ability to give users a compelling illusion of "being there" in virtual environments. This illusion is often referred to as presence or place illusion [47], and has been described as the subjective correlate of immersion [48]. Place illusion describes the subjective experience of a user, whereas immersion relates to objective characteristics of the system used to deliver this experience. The more immersive a system is, the higher degree of presence it can elicit. Immersive systems have been characterized based on the sensorimotor contingencies (SCs) they support [47]. SCs are the actions a person can perform in order to perceive the world (e.g., changing one's gaze direction by moving the head or eyes, or kneeling to see underneath something). The level of immersion supported by a given VR-system depends on how well it supports normal SCs. Therefore, in this review, when discussing immersion, we operate with the term "system immersion" [46]. A number of factors related to both displays and tracking can affect system immersion, however, for the purpose of the current review, we adopt a simple dichotomous categorization with respect to immersion. Level of immersion is distinguished between two broad categories of systems: immersive systems and non-immersive systems. Immersive systems allow users to view virtual content in all directions (i.e., they have an unlimited field of regard, FOR), even though the field of view (FOV) usually is smaller than the users' visual field. Contrarily, non-immersive systems only offer a limited FOR and a limited FOV (e.g., screen-and projection-based systems).

### 1.3. Specific and Non-specific Systems

When the Nintendo Wii launched in 2006, it quickly became an affordable closed system, that supported physical activity with games and entertainment, with researchers soon after applying it to physical therapy programs [49]. This caused a shift from bespoke systems (i.e., software and hardware solutions created for specific users and contexts) toward commercially available solutions [12]. A recent systematic review exploring types of VR applications within rehabilitation, characterize these different systems dichotomously as either specific (systems specifically built for rehabilitation) or non-specific (i.e., computerized systems meant for recreational activities and gaming) [50]. However, systems can be simultaneously commercial and specific. This is evident from the increasing amount of companies developing high-end equipment, where gamification principles are embedded into the therapy (IREX, VRRS-systems, and others) [50]. Systems can also be custom-built from existing hardware and software, tailored for specific needs (i.e., bespoke systems). We argue that a distinction has to be made between commercial and bespoke systems, since low availability and accessibility of certain VR-systems challenges the reproducibility of findings or clinical applications. This is most commonly a trait of bespoke systems, which are usually developed in closed ecosystems, specifically to solve contextual challenges. Conversely, commercially available "off-the-shelf" systems can more reliably reproduce results. This means that cross-study analyses would gain a homogeneous data sets, and that any heterogeneity found in e.g., meta-analyses would more confidently be attributed to sampling error.

### 1.4. The Potential Challenges of Ambiguous Classifications

The caveat to IVR and a main reason why a clear distinction is important for systematic reviews, is how the technology leads to demonstrably larger levels of side-effects, when compared to conventional displays [51–54]. These side effects are also known as VR-sickness, cybersickness, VR-induced symptoms, and effects (VRISE) [51], or visually induced motion sickness [55]. In a study from 2008, Sharples et al. compared side-effects between different display technologies, including HMD, desktop monitor and projection screens [51]. The results indicated a significant increase in nausea symptoms when using HMD, compared to desktop and projection screens. Technology has progressed substantially since 2008, by including improved frame-rate and refresh rates frequencies to accommodate human-eye resolution and sensorimotor contingencies [56]. However, cybersickness remains an unsolved problem with IVR technology. A commonly used measure of VR-sickness is the simulator sickness questionnaire (SSQ) [57]. While ironically not developed for IVR, it is a frequently used, standardized and validated measure of the severity of symptoms related to nausea, oculomotor disturbances and disorientation, while using a VR-system. It has also previously been used to measure adverse events related to VRBR-use [58], although often reported incorrectly. Additionally, it has been suggested that only IVR-technology should be defined as VR [14]. More specifically, solutions utilizing non-immersive technologies to facilitate an immersive and interactive digital environment. We agree with Tieri et al. [14], therefore, another aim our work is to propose a model to better classify the use of VR-equipment in clinical contexts.

This review seeks to distinguish between the broader uses of VR, which encompasses non-immersive VR (NVR), for example video games and consoles such as Nintendo Wii, and the more discrete use of IVR, where the "immersion" is a property of the technical system [46] such as with HMDs. Like Tieri et al. [14], we believe taxonomic consistency is more pertinent now than it was previously, as the availability of commercial IVR-systems will continue to increase the demand for clinical applications. Paradoxically, the evidence in favor of the safety, affordance, feasibility, efficacy, and implementation within clinical use, is still in its infancy. Furthermore, a classification of VRBR solutions for clinical application is needed, to frame such evidence and to allow practitioners suitable awareness, before including solutions into daily practice. And since the geriatric population is the largest group with rehabilitation needs, this is a good place to commence.

### 1.5. Research Questions

This review focuses on VRBR of older adults (+60) in motor rehabilitation programs. The aim of this review is to:

1. Retrospectively classify previous studies according to level of immersion, in order to get an overview of the ambiguity-phenomenon.
2. Utilize meta-analyses and subgroup analysis to determine outcome effect variations between IVR and NVR.
3. Evaluate the comparative effectiveness of system immersion in IVR and NVR systems.
4. Analyze comparative risks and adverse events between IVR and NVR systems.

## 2. Methods

The systematic review protocol was registered in PROSPERO (ID: CRD42019121172), and the reporting of the review was conducted following the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analysis (PRISMA) guidelines [59].

### 2.1. Eligibility Criteria

The selection of studies were conducted based on prespecified PICOS (participants, interventions, comparisons, outcomes, and study design) [59]:

- **Participants:** older adults (≥60 years old).
- **Intervention:** VR-based motor rehabilitation (e.g., for non-neurological muscular dysfunction, replacement surgery, prosthetic adaptation, or traumatic injuries).
- **Comparison:** conventional therapy or usual care.
- **Outcome:** Mobility and balance, motivation, pain, and adverse events (e.g., cybersickness, fall injuries, dizziness, eye strain, or other reported adverse incidents).
- **Study design:** Randomized Controlled Trials (RCT). Both parallel - and crossover groups.

### 2.2. Information Sources

The systematic search was undertaken on the following databases: PubMed/MEDLINE, Web of Science, CINAHL, Cochrane Library, and EMBASE to find articles describing randomized controlled trials (RCT), published in English, Danish, Swedish, or Norwegian.

### 2.3. Search

The search strategy was developed by and approved by all authors. The searches were performed by SMF and SWH who (1) extracted studies from the databases into EndNote; (2) performed duplicate removal; (3) uploaded them into Covidence for screening. All databases were searched from inception to the 30th April 2020.

Search strings were adapted to fit each database individually using boolean search operators and limited to Human studies and Randomized Controlled Trials whenever possible. Search themes included rehabilitation or physical therapy using virtual reality, "exergames" or video games. A broad search for video games as well was to not only search for interventions describing non-immersive applications. A full list of all searches performed can be found in the Supplementary Material.

### 2.4. Study Selection

Title and abstract screening was performed by ERH and TMP; articles were excluded based on the following criteria: no full text available, wrong language, not peer-reviewed, wrong study design, wrong study population (participants are healthy adults, under the age of 60 or principle diagnosis was neurological), wrong outcomes or wrong setting.

A blinded full-text screening was performed independently by two reviewers (ERH and TMP). Conflicts were resolved by ERH and TMP through discussion, or with arbitration by third reviewer (KBJ).

### 2.5. Data Collection Process

Quantitative data was extracted from the included studies by pairwise independent reviewers (ERH, TMP, KBJ, JPE, and NCN) using a standardized data extraction form, which was presented and agreed upon at a joint meeting. Inter-rater conflicts in the data extraction process was resolved by ERH and TMP in consensus.

**FIGURE 1** | The PRISMA flow diagram for the systematic review detailing the selection process of the included RCT studies.

```
Records identified through database          Additional records identified through
searching                                     other sources
(n = 3507)                                    (n = 0)
       │
       ▼
Records after duplicates removed
(n = 2202)
       │
       ▼
Records screened                              Records excluded
(n = 2202)                                    (n = 2039)
       │
       ▼
Full-text articles assessed for               Full-text articles excluded,
eligibility                                   with reasons
(n = 163)                                     (n = 148)
                                               Wrong patient population: 78
                                               Only protocol available: 27
                                               Wrong study design: 26
                                               Wrong comparator: 12
                                               Wrong intervention: 3
                                               Wrong language: 1
                                               No full text: 1
       │
       ▼
Studies included in
quantitative synthesis
(n = 15)
       │
       ▼
Studies included in meta-
analysis
(n = 10)
```

### 2.6. Assessment of Risk of Bias in Included Studies

We utilized the Cochrane Collaboration's RoB Tool [59] to evaluate the methodological quality of the included studies. RoB assessment was independently performed by two paired reviewers (ERH, TMP, NCN, JPE, and KBJ). Conflicts were resolved by ERH and TMP.

### 2.7. Data Analysis

Results from the different trials were pooled using RevMan 5.4 [60]. The primary outcomes for balance was determined as either timed tasks such as Timed Up and Go (TUG), or composite scores such as the Berg's Balance Scale (BBS). For functional mobility, the outcomes were limited to timed tasks such as the six minute walk test (6mWT) or the 10 meter walk test (10mWT). Pain-measurements were limited to standardizable self-reported uni-dimensional measures, such as visual analog scales (VAS), numerical rating scales (NRS). To estimate effect sizes of outcomes, we used standard mean difference (SMD) for different (or variations of the same) instruments, including VAS and BBS. For studies using similar instruments the mean difference (MD) was used.

Random-effects were used for all analyses, as the included populations were likely not functionally equivalent, since the interventions described different outcomes and patient populations. Variability within studies are reported in forest plots. Subgroup analysis to determine differences between IVR and NVR studies were performed. Due to the low amount of IVR-studies, subgroup analysis was only undertaken for pain. Heterogeneity was assessed individually for each outcome and considered insignificant if the I² value was beneath a moderate level >50% as suggested by Higgins and Thompson [61]. Effects are considered statistically significant if p ≤ 0.05. All analyses use End of Treatment (EoT) scores.

## 3. Results

### 3.1. Study Identification

Through the different databases, we identified 3,507 articles matching the search strategy. No additional records were identified. After removing duplicates, 2,202 articles were screened, and 2,039 articles were excluded based on title and abstract, because they did not match the inclusion criteria. The full search strategy is outlined in Figure 1. Many of the excluded articles described interventions that did not include virtual rehabilitation. Among the most frequent occurrences were interventions with cold-water immersion. One hundred and sixty-three articles published between 1999 [62] and April 2020 were assessed for eligibility and 15 articles (n = 743) satisfied the inclusion criteria and 10 (n = 555) articles satisfied the correct outcomes required for conducting a meta-analysis.

Of the 15 included articles describing RCT interventions (see Table 1), two studies used specific commercial IVR technology [63,64], one study used a specific commercial NVR system (Nirvana VR system) [65] and one intervention used a bespoke specific system [66]. Six studies used NVR non-specific commercial systems, either Nintendo Wii Fit [30,67–71] or Sony PlayStation with Eye Toy [72], and four studies used specific bespoke systems [73–76]. Of the included studies, 13 referred to "virtual reality" while only two did not mention virtual reality, but referred to "exergames" [74,75]. All IVR studies referred to the intervention as "VR" [63,64,66], and four NVR studies referred to the intervention as "VR" [65,69,71,72] while the remaining studies described the intervention as interactive gaming [30] or exergames [74,75]; visual feedback [76] or sensor-based balance training [73] and Wii Fit Training/Wii exercise [67,68,70]. Two articles used "virtual reality" in the title or abstract, but provided very limited mention of VR in the full-text [70,76], and VR was not mentioned as part of the intervention. Authors were contacted for two articles to clarify system specific details. Both contacts responded within 4 months.

Participants and settings varied across the included articles. Four articles recruited older adults living in residential aged care [65,67,70,74]. Older adults with balance difficulties living in the community were the focus of three articles [63,68,76]. Two articles recruited participants following total knee arthroplasty [64,66]. Frail older adults were recruited in one study [71]. A range of different diagnoses in the inpatient setting were the focus of two studies [30,75]. Chronic conditions such as diabetes mellitus [72], peripheral neuropathy [73], and chronic low back pain [69]. Dosage of the interventions varied as well between 20 and 90 min per session (mean ± SD: 43.7 ± 19.8), between 1 and 5 weekly sessions (2.7 ± 1) for durations between 3 and 12 weeks (6.6 ± 2.7).

**TABLE 1** | Characteristics of included articles.

| References | Population | N (% male); Mean (SD) age | Country | Main outcomes | Dosage mm/d (w) | Comparison | VR system | Classification |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| Anson et al. [76] | Older adults with balance difficulties | 40 (27.5); 75.7 (5.8) | USA | Improve balance | 30 / 3 (4) | Treadmill without visual feedback | TV-screen and threadmill | NVR-S (B) |
| Gianola et al. [64] | Patients with total knee arthroplasty | 74 (43.5); 68.8 (8.8) | Italy | Increase efficacy of early rehab, decrease pain intensity | 60 ("5 days") | Passive knee motion on Kinetec knee continuous passive motion system | Khymeia VRRS | IVR-S (C) |
| Jin et al. [66] | Osteoarthritis patients with total knee arthroplasty | 66 (42); 66.4 (3.9) | China | Decrease pain and improve knee range-of-motion | 30*3 / - (-) | Exercise program | HMD (Mide Technology Inc.) | IVR-S (B) |
| Kwok and Pua [71] | Frail older adults | 73 (30); 70.1 (7.1) | Singapore | Improve functional outcomes and fear of falling | 20 / 1 (12) | Gym exercise class + home exercise | Nintendo Wii Active + Wii Balance Board | NVR-NS (C) |
| Laver et al. [30] | Inpatients with different admission diagnoses | 42 (20.4); 84.9 (4.5) | Australia | Investigate feasibility and clinical outcomes for mobility | 25 / 5 (-) | Matched activities for the duration of the stay | Wii Fit + wireless pointer | NVR-NS (C) |
| Lee and Shin [72] | Older adults with diabetes mellitus | 55 (29.1); 74 (4.9) | South Korea | Improve balance, strength, gait and fall efficacy | 50 / 2 (10) | Health education on diabetes management | PlayStation 2 + EyeToy | NVR-NS (C) |
| Sobral Monteiro-Junior et al. [69] | Older women with chronic low back pain | 30 (0); 68 (4) | Brazil | Decrease chronic pain, increase physical capabilities and mood | 90 / 3 (8) | Strength exercise | Nintendo Wii + Wii Balance Board | NVR-NS (C) |
| Morone et al. [68] | Women with bone loss conditions due to balance disorders | 38 (0); 68.9 (4.2) | Italy | Improve balance, quality of life, fear of falling and well-being | 60 / 2 (8) | Conventional exercise and balance training | Nintendo Wii Fit | NVR-NS (C) |
| Tsang and Fu [70] | Older adults living in aged care facilities | 79 (39); 82.1 (4) | China | Improve balance control in older adults | 60 / 3 (6) | Conventional balance training | Nintendo Wii Fit | NVR-NS (C) |
| Yeşilyaprak et al. [65] | Older adults living in nursing homes | 18 (33.3); 71.9 (4.5) | Turkey | Increase balance and reduce risk of falls | 45 / 3 (6) | Conventional balance exercise | NIRVANA VR Interactive System | NVR-S (C) |
| Duque et al. [63] | Older adults with balance difficulties | 68 (39); 76.8 (9.1) | Australia | Improve balance, reduce risk of falls and fear of falling | 30 / 2 (6) | Usual care | BRU balance training | IVR-S (C) |
| Fu et al. [67] | Frail older adults from nursing home | 60 (35); 82.4 (4) | China | Reduce risk and incidence of falls | 60 / 3 (6) | Usual care | Nintendo Wii Fit | NVR-NS (C) |
| Mugueta-Aguinaga and Garcia-Zapirain [74] | Older adults from residential homes | 39 (40); 84.3 (7.8) | Spain | Reduce frailty risks | 20 / "9" (3) | No activity | Kinect + FRED exergame | NVR-S (B) |
| Schwenk et al. [73] | Older cancer patients with chemotherapy-induced peripheral neuropathy | 22 (41); 70.3 (8.7) | USA | Improve postural balance | 45 / 2 (4) | No exercise intervention | Wearable sensors | NVR-S (B) |
| Oesch et al. [75] | Geriatric inpatients | 39 (53.7); IG: 73.8* (-) | Switzerland | Improve adherence and motivation | 2x30 ("10 days") | Instruction leaflets | Kinect-based | NVR-S (B) |

N, sample size; SD, standard deviation; "-", missing data; *, median/IQR reported; IG, intervention group; dosage, minutes per session/days per week (total weeks); NVR, Non-immersive VR; IVR, Immersive VR; S, Specific; NS, Non-specific; B, Bespoke; C, Commercial.

### 3.2. Mobility and Balance

A range of outcome-measures were used. The most commonly used outcomes for mobility and balance were Timed Up and Go (TUG) [30,65,70–72,76], Berg Balance Scale (BBS) [30,65,68,70,72,76], and six-minute walk test (6MWT) [71,76]. Other measures included posturography [63,73,75], short physical performance battery (SPPB) [63,67,74], and fall risk [67]. Six studies were included in the meta-analysis for the overall effect of NVR (VFB treadmill, Nintendo Wii, Playstation 2 + EyeToy, NIRVANA VR Interactive System) on TUG scores as a measure of dynamic balance (Figure 2). The mean time to complete the TUG ranged from 9.1 (±1.1) s to 28.86 (±11.71) s across the studies. The MD between experimental and control groups ranged from 0.23 to 1.11 s. Considerable heterogeneity was found between studies (Tau² = 0.08, Chi² = 15.50, df = 5, I² = 68%, df = 5). Compared to the control group, the SMD between groups on TUG scores was significantly greater for the VR group, demonstrating a significant treatment effect (Z = 1.94, p = 0.05).

**FIGURE 2** | Forest plot of outcome measures for balance assessment using timed tasks, specifically timed up-and-go (TUG), for VR-based therapy vs. control (EoT).

| Mean Difference | IV, Random, 95% CI |
|---|---|
| -1.10 [-2.90, 0.70] | [-0.53, 0.53] |
| 0.00 [-0.53, 0.53] | [-0.75, 0.50] |
| -0.96 [-7.52, 5.60] | [-2.49 [-3.71, -1.27]] |
| -1.20 [-2.35, -0.05] | [-0.40 [-4.08, 3.28]] |
| -1.06 [-2.14, 0.01] | [-1.06 [-2.14, 0.01] |

Heterogeneity: τ²=0.96; χ²=15.50, df = 5 (P = 0.008); I²=68%
Test for overall effect: Z = 1.94 (P = 0.05)

Six studies were included in the meta analysis for the overall effect of NVR (VFB treadmill, Nintendo Wii Fit, Playstation 2 + EyeToy, NIRVANA VR Interactive System) on BBS scores as a measure of balance (Figure 3). The mean BBS scores ranged from 30.1 (±8.84) to 53.41 (±1.49) across the studies. The MD between experimental and control groups ranged from 0 to -2.49 s. Considerable heterogeneity was found between studies (Tau² = 0.96, Chi² = 9.03, df = 5, I² = 45%, df = 5). Compared to the control group, the SMD between groups on BBS scores was significantly greater for the VR group, demonstrating a significant treatment effect (Z = 4.02, p ≤ 0.0001).

**FIGURE 3** | Forest plot of outcome measures for balance assessment using Berg Balance Scale (BBS) for VR-based therapy vs. control (EoT).

| Favours [Control] | Favours [Experimental] |
|---|---|
| 0.25 | 0.75 |
| 0.35 | 1.00 |
| 0.90 | 1.10 |

Test for overall effect: Z = 4.02 (P < 0.0001)
Heterogeneity: τ²=0.08; χ²=9.03, df = 5 (P = 0.11); I²=45%

Two studies were included in the meta-analysis for the overall effect of NVR (VFB treadmill, Nintendo Wii Fit) on 6MWT scores (Figure 4). The mean 6MWT scores ranged from 323.7 (±25.9) s to 387.8 (±70.8) s across the studies. Considerable heterogeneity was found between studies (Tau²=0.00, Chi²=0.73, df=1, I²=0%). Compared to the control group, the SMD between groups on 6MWT scores was not significantly different between the VR group and control group (Z=1.85, p=0.06).

**FIGURE 4** | Forest plot of timed tasks, specifically 6MWT, for functional mobility outcome measures for VR-based therapy vs. control (EoT).

| Study or Subgroup | Experimental | Control | Mean Difference |
|---|---|---|---|
| | Mean | SD | Mean | IV, Random, 95% CI |
| **1.6.1 Non-immersive** | | | | |
| Anson 2018 | 387.8 | 70.8 | 10.20 [-39.61, 60.01] |
| Kwok 2016 | 323.7 | 25.9 | -12.20 [-24.18, -0.22] |
| **Subtotal (95% CI)** | **323.7** | **25.9** | **-10.98 [-22.62, 0.67]** |

Heterogeneity: Tau² = 0.00; Chi² = 0.73, df = 1 (P = 0.39); I² = 0%
Test for overall effect: Z = 1.85 (P = 0.06)

| Favours [Experimental] | Favours [Control] |

### 3.3. Motivation

Adherence, enjoyment and motivation were measured in only one study [75]. The primary outcome of the study was the adherence to exercise as measured by the duration of exercise each day. Motivation and enjoyment were measured after each training using a five-point Likert scale. Each of these outcomes, adherence, motivation, and enjoyment were found to be favored in the conventional exercise group. Another study measured game satisfaction on a custom dichotomous scale with direct "yes/no" questions, but only for the experimental group [74].

### 3.4. Pain

Two studies were included in the meta-analysis for the overall effect of IVR (Khymeia VRRS, HTC Vive) on pain scores for patients following total knee arthroplasty. The SMD between groups on pain scores was significantly greater for the VR group, demonstrating a significant treatment effect (Z = 2.57, p = 0.01). Two studies were included in the meta-analysis for the overall effect of NVR (Nintendo WiiFit) on pain scores for people with chronic low back pain and balance disorders. There was no significant difference between the NVR and control groups (Z = 0.78, p = 0.44). Comparison of IVR and NVR demonstrated no significant difference in overall treatment effect between type of VR (Z = 1.03, p = 0.02) (Figure 5).

**FIGURE 5** | Forest plot of studies measuring pain intensity through unidimensional measures, using a visual analog scale (VAS), for VR-based therapy vs. control (EoT).

| Study or Subgroup | Experimental | Control | Std. Mean Difference | Std. Mean Difference |
|---|---|---|---|---|
| | Mean | SD | Total | Mean | SD | Total | Weight | IV, Random, 95% CI | IV, Random, 95% CI |
| **1.1.1 Immersive** | | | | | | | | | |
| Gianola 2020 | 24.62 | 16.8 | 35 | 31.23 | 19.59 | 39 | 29.0% | -0.36 [-0.82, 0.10] | |
| Jin 2018 | 3.87 | 0.55 | 33 | 4.42 | 0.79 | 33 | 27.5% | -0.80 [-1.30, -0.30] | |
| **Subtotal (95% CI)** | | | 68 | | | 72 | 56.5% | -0.57 [-1.00, -0.13] | |
| Heterogeneity: Tau² = 0.04; Chi² = 1.61, df = 1 (P = 0.20); I² = 38% | | | | | | | | |
| Test for overall effect: Z = 2.57 (P = 0.01) | | | | | | | | |
| **1.1.2 Non-immersive** | | | | | | | | |
| Monteiro Junior 2015 | 1.7 | 1.9 | 16 | 1.4 | 2.9 | 14 | 20.5% | 0.12 [-0.60, 0.84] | |
| Morone 2016 | 4.6 | 1.8 | 19 | 4.1 | 2.2 | 19 | 22.9% | 0.24 [-0.39, 0.88] | |
| **Subtotal (95% CI)** | | | 35 | | | 33 | 43.5% | 0.19 [-0.29, 0.67] | |
| Heterogeneity: Tau² = 0.00; Chi² = 0.06, df = 1 (P = 0.80); I² = 0% | | | | | | | | |
| Test for overall effect: Z = 0.78 (P = 0.44) | | | | | | | | |
| **Total (95% CI)** | | | 103 | | | 105 | 100.0% | -0.24 [-0.70, 0.22] | |
| Heterogeneity: Tau² = 0.14; Chi² = 7.94, df = 3 (P = 0.05); I² = 62% | | | | | | | | |
| Test for overall effect: Z = 1.03 (P = 0.30) | | | | | | | | |
| Test for subgroup differences: Chi² = 5.28, df = 1 (P = 0.02), I² = 81.1% | | | | | | | | |

### 3.5. Adverse Events and Dropouts

Two studies mentioned that adverse events were observed during the intervention [30,75], and five articles mentioned that no adverse events were detected [64,65,71,73,76]. The majority of the studies made no specific mention of adverse events [63,66–70,72,74].

Dropouts varied across studies and interventions (Figure 6). The absolute risk of the experimental group was 41 vs. 20 for the control groups. The weighted average dropout rate was 10% for experimental groups and 5% for control groups. The highest number of dropouts were seen in Oesch et al. [75] 11/28 in the experimental group, whereas the authors identify 7 dropouts related to the treatment either due to dislike (n=5) or experience of pain (n=2).

**FIGURE 6** | Forest plot of study dropouts.

| Study or Subgroup | Experimental Events | Total | Control Events | Total | Weight | Odds Ratio IV, Fixed, 95% CI |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| **1.7.1 Immersive** | | | | | | |
| Duque 2013 | 2 | 30 | 0 | 30 | 3.8% | 5.35 [0.25, 116.31] |
| Gianola 2020 | 9 | 44 | 2 | 41 | 14.0% | 5.01 [1.01, 24.80] |
| Jin 2018 | 0 | 33 | 0 | 33 | | Not estimable |
| **Subtotal (95% CI)** | | 107 | | 104 | 17.7% | 5.08 [1.23, 21.01] |
| Total events | 11 | | 2 | | | |
| Heterogeneity: χ²=0.00, df=1 (P=0.97); I²=0% | | | | | | |
| Test for overall effect: Z = 2.25 (P = 0.02) | | | | | | |
| **1.7.2 Non-immersive** | | | | | | |
| Anson 2018 | 3 | 23 | 1 | 21 | 6.5% | 3.00 [0.29, 31.35] |
| Fu 2015 | 0 | 30 | 0 | 30 | | Not estimable |
| Kwok 2016 | 3 | 40 | 4 | 40 | 14.6% | 0.73 [0.15, 3.49] |
| Laver 2012 | 2 | 22 | 0 | 22 | 3.7% | 5.49 [0.25, 121.18] |
| Lee 2013 | 5 | 32 | 4 | 32 | 17.8% | 1.30 [0.31, 5.35] |
| Monteiro Junior 2015 | 1 | 17 | 3 | 17 | 6.3% | 0.29 [0.03, 3.13] |
| Morone 2016 | 0 | 19 | 0 | 19 | | Not estimable |
| Mugueta 2017 | 0 | 20 | 1 | 20 | 3.4% | 0.32 [0.01, 8.26] |
| Oesch 2017 | 11 | 28 | 4 | 26 | 20.9% | 3.56 [0.96, 13.16] |
| Scwenk 2016 | 2 | 11 | 1 | 11 | 5.4% | 2.22 [0.17, 28.86] |
| Tsang 2016 | 0 | 39 | 0 | 40 | | Not estimable |
| Yeilyaprak 2016 | 3 | 10 | 0 | 11 | 3.7% | 10.73 [0.48, 238.90] |
| **Subtotal (95% CI)** | | 291 | | 289 | 82.3% | 1.66 [0.86, 3.20] |
| Total events | 30 | | 18 | | | |
| Heterogeneity: χ²=7.79, df = 8 (P = 0.45); I² = 0% | | | | | | |
| Test for overall effect: Z = 1.50 (P = 0.13) | | | | | | |
| **Total (95% CI)** | | 398 | | 393 | 100.0% | 2.02 [1.11, 3.67] |
| Total events | 41 | | 20 | | | |
| Heterogeneity: χ²=9.77, df = 10 (P = 0.46); I² = 0% | | | | | | |
| Test for overall effect: Z = 2.31 (P = 0.02) | | | | | | |
| Test for subgroup differences: χ²=1.98, df=1 (P=0.16), I²=49.4% | | | | | | |

### 3.6. Risk of Bias Assessment

The risk of bias analysis was performed to assess the methodological quality of the articles included in the quantitative synthesis. The resulting summary can be seen in Figure 7. No additional sources of bias were discovered.

**FIGURE 7** | Risk of bias (RoB) summary of included studies (only quantitative synthesis). Icon explanations: green "+" low risk of bias; red "−", high risk of bias; yellow "?" uncertain risk of bias.

```
                    Sequence   Allocation   Blinding of   Blinding of   Incomplete   Selective   Other
                    generation  concealment  participants   outcome       outcome      outcome     sources
                                             and personnel  assessors     data         reporting   of bias
Monteiro Junior       +            +             -             +             -            -          -
2015
Yeilyaprak            +            -             -             -             -            -          -
2016
Tsang 2016            +            -             -             -             +            -          -
Morone 2016           +            ?             -             -             +            -          -
Gianola 2020          +            +             -             +             -            +          ?
Laver 2012            +            +             -             +             +            ?          ?
Kwok 2016             ?            ?             -             ?             +            ?          ?
Anson 2018            +            -             -             +             ?            +          ?
Lee 2013              +            -             -             -             ?            -          ?
Jin 2018              ?            -             -             -             +            -          ?
```

#### 3.6.1. Selection Bias

All studies except two [66,71] described a random component when allocating participants to groups (sequence generation). However, six of the included studies did not conceal allocation when assigning participants to the intervention groups (allocation concealment) assessed as a high risk [65,66,69,70,72,76].

#### 3.6.2. Performance Bias

Blinding of participants and personnel is almost always impossible in physical health research [77], which is also reflected in all of the study receiving a high risk assessment.

#### 3.6.3. Detection Bias

While blinding of participants or personnel is impossible, blinding of outcome assessors is still feasible. However, half of the studies [65,66,68,70,72] reported that outcomes were assessed by the same people who performed the experiment which we estimate as a high risk. One study [71] did not specify details (unknown risk) and four studies [30,64,69,76] took steps to blind outcome assessors (low risk).

#### 3.6.4. Attrition Bias

Concerning incomplete outcome data, three studies had no missing data [66,68,70] (low risk, see also Figure 6). Two studies reported dropouts, but outcomes were calculated based on the number of participants, and intention-to-treat was used to account for missing data [30,68] (low risk). Two studies [72,76] had a low and slightly disproportionate dropout-rate in favor of the control group, however performed a per-protocol analysis (uncertain risk). Three studies [64,65,69] had moderate dropouts, disproportionately in favor of the control group, and conducted a per-protocol analysis with no attempts at an intention-to-treat analysis (high risk).

#### 3.6.5. Reporting Bias

We did not compare trial protocols with published outcomes, therefore intervention effects could be overestimated. Selective outcome reporting was assessed based on whether or not the articles made a reference to an existing protocol. Only three studies referenced a prospectively registered trial protocol [64,69,76], two studies were retrospectively registered [30,71], and five studies made no reference to a protocol receiving a high risk assessment [65,66,68,70,72]. We justify an unknown risk for retrospectively registered trials because reported outcomes in the registry technically could reflect findings of the study, which could also indicate overestimated intervention effects.

### 3.7. Frequency and Classification of Publications With IVR Interventions

To further gain an understanding of the inconsistent use of "VR" as a term to describe technological systems, articles excluded in the full text screening (n=163), were reviewed. After excluding protocols, wrong study design, and "no full text available" articles, the following was extracted from the articles (n=108): information such as intervention description, immersion type, specificity, and availability of software/hardware (commercial or bespoke), the equipment used, and how the authors describe the intervention. Over half om the articles (n=60) used VR to describe the intervention, and three articles used the descriptor "VR" only as a keyword, with no further mention in the paper. Of the 60 articles, 49 (82%) used non-immersive equipment, 10 (17%) used high-immersive equipment (HMD or CAVE systems) and one article did not describe the equipment used in detail, but just referred to "VR-technology" [78], which made classification impossible.

**FIGURE 8** | Frequency plot of the articles (n = 60), published between 1999 and 2020, which were excluded in the eligibility assessment, who used "Virtual Reality" to refer to the intervention. The graph shows interventions post-classified as immersive or non-immersive, by the authors, according to the taxonomy of virtual rehabilitation systems (see Figure 9).

| YEAR | Non-immersive | Immersive | Unknown |
|---|---|---|---|
| 1999 | 0 | 1 | 0 |
| 2000 | 1 | 0 | 0 |
| 2005 | 1 | 0 | 0 |
| 2006 | 1 | 0 | 0 |
| 2007 | 0 | 0 | 0 |
| 2008 | 1 | 0 | 0 |
| 2009 | 0 | 0 | 0 |
| 2010 | 1 | 1 | 0 |
| 2011 | 1 | 0 | 0 |
| 2012 | 3 | 1 | 0 |
| 2013 | 3 | 0 | 2 |
| 2014 | 2 | 1 | 0 |
| 2015 | 4 | 2 | 0 |
| 2016 | 8 | 0 | 0 |
| 2017 | 10 | 0 | 0 |
| 2018 | 6 | 2 | 0 |
| 2019 | 7 | 0 | 0 |
| 2020 | 1 | 1 | 0 |

## 4. Discussion

Virtual rehabilitation continues to evolve as an independent field of study [12]. However, despite spanning over two decades, the effectiveness of VR-systems continues to elude, whether specifically made for rehabilitation purposes or adapting recreational non-specific games [50]. Furthermore, the use of the technology for older adults in non-neurological disorders is still scarce. Even more surprisingly, VR remains a "buzzword" used to describe interventions that do not use IVR-equipment. Both the Oculus Rift CV1 and the HTC Vive were released commercially in early 2016, and the Oculus Rift DK1 was available as early as 2012. Yet, even though VR-systems are now of higher quality and lower prices than previously, IVR-systems appear to be still under-represented in virtual rehabilitation (Figure 8). We argue that an increasing public awareness of what could constitute a VR-system, paired with a general lack of research consensus on how it should be specifically interpreted and understood, poses a potential health-risk. An example is how the assessment of adverse events are generally under-prioritized in RTCs [79]. Our findings affirmed this, as we found adverse events to be generally poorly reported. Although the reporting of no events may be due to a lack of occurrence, it may also be due to only serious events being considered and negligible effects. An example could be how a slight dizziness could easily go unreported. Meanwhile, there is a complexity to adverse effects evaluation, as negligible symptoms may be ignored for (or by) some patient populations, while the same symptoms could be considered severe for (or by) others.

Nevertheless, measuring nausea or other VR-related side-effects using standardized tools, is seldom an independent outcome prioritized in randomized trials. However, users experiencing VR-sickness, remains an unsolved challenge which is more frequently observed in IVR-systems [51–54]. Therefore, if clinical trials are included in syntheses, without accounting for the degree of system immersion, prevalent adverse events may go unnoticed. This has potential harmful human consequences, as national- or international health authorities base their clinical guidelines on these RCT-studies, reviews and meta-analyses, that may not differentiate systems or adverse effects correctly.

The subgroup-analysis between IVR and NVR revealed that the dropout rate for IVR-studies were higher than for NVR-studies. While both tended to have a higher retention for the control group, the dropout rate for IVR experimental groups were significant (p = 0.02) while the NVR experimental groups was not (p = 0.10). Adverse events were often not properly addressed, except for two studies [30,64], who both included a detailed description and discussion. Due to poor reporting we cannot infer causality between dropouts and adverse events. However, description from Gianola et al. [64] does highlight that dropouts might also be connected to the participants feeling "uncomfortable" wearing the HMD, or lacking face-to-face contact with the therapist. A recent study exploring the acceptance of HMDs among older adults, concluded that attitude changed to positive after experiencing the technology with minimal symptoms. However, there are some caveats related to the authors' conclusion, that negative attitudes or VR-sickness is negligible. Firstly, the results relate to healthy older adults, thus not synonymous and possibly not applicable to more vulnerable users. Secondly, the VR-application used in the experiment (Perfect by nDreams) has the lowest rating on the Oculus comfort spectrum [80], which implies that related symptoms will be very low. VR content has a significant impact on the amount of symptoms experienced [81], and symptoms should therefore be evaluated across different content characteristics, before validating a generalized use.

At least one article describes preliminary steps to delimit adverse events [69], but it would be beneficial if adverse events, related to IVR-systems, are measured more consistently with standardized instruments (e.g., the SSQ) in future studies. This would allow to gain a more systematic understanding of the potential challenges with VR as a therapeutic tool across different patient populations, age-groups, and systems.

### 4.1. Summary of Main Findings

The studies included in this review varied widely across the intervention type and dosage, outcome measures participant characteristics and setting. Participants in the included studies ranged from hospital inpatients, to residential aged care, to people living in the community. This range of settings and focus on different conditions or diagnoses, suggests that participants may be different at baseline, making it difficult to compare. Additionally, all analyses had high heterogeneity, demonstrating large variation across the included studies. While motivation, engagement and adherence are commonly cited as benefits of the use of VR in the therapy setting, only one study evaluated this outcome [75]. This seems paradoxical, since motivation is often a central principle in the reasoning for using the technology in the first place.

#### 4.1.1. Taxonomy of Virtual Rehabilitation Systems

Although the intention to classify VR-systems based on level of immersion was pre-specified in the protocol, a Taxonomy of Virtual Rehabilitation Systems was developed a posteriori to the findings in this review, expand upon the different types of VR-systems, both in terms of immersion [non-immersive (NVR) vs. immersive (IVR)] and specificity [specific (S) vs. non-specific (NS)] (see Figure 9). The latter is describing systems developed exclusively for rehabilitation purposes (specific), as opposed to recreational and/or off-the-shelf video games, which have simply been applied to rehabilitation interventions (non-specific) [50]. Furthermore, to account for implications for practical applications and availability of the systems, the taxonomy sub-classifies each type of system. Specifically, this depends on whether or not the systems are commercially (C) available as a "closed system," or have been developed as bespoke (B) technology, which presumably makes it less accessible as an off-the-shelf product.

**FIGURE 9** | Taxonomy of virtual rehabilitation systems.

```
┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│                                         VIRTUAL REALITY                                          │
│                                      REHABILITATION SYSTEMS                                      │
└─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘
                                    │
            ┌───────────────────────┴───────────────────────┐
            │                                               │
            ▼                                               ▼
    ┌───────────────┐                               ┌───────────────┐
    │ NON-IMMERSIVE │                               │   IMMERSIVE   │
    │      VR       │                               │      VR       │
    │     (NVR)     │                               │     (IVR)     │
    └───────────────┘                               └───────────────┘
            │                                               │
    ┌───────┴───────┐                               ┌───────┴───────┐
    │               │                               │               │
    ▼               ▼                               ▼               ▼
┌───────┐       ┌───────┐                       ┌───────┐       ┌───────┐
│ NON-  │       │ SPEC- │                       │ NON-  │       │ SPEC- │
│ SPEC- │       │ IFIC  │                       │ SPEC- │       │ IFIC  │
│ IFIC  │       │ (S)   │                       │ IFIC  │       │ (S)   │
│ (NS)  │       │       │                       │ (NS)  │       │       │
└───────┘       └───────┘                       └───────┘       └───────┘
    │               │                               │               │
┌───┴───┐       ┌───┴───┐                       ┌───┴───┐       ┌───┴───┐
│       │       │       │                       │       │       │       │
▼       ▼       ▼       ▼                       ▼       ▼       ▼       ▼
C       B       C       B                       C       B       C       B
│       │       │       │                       │       │       │       │
▼       ▼       ▼       ▼                       ▼       ▼       ▼       ▼
Com-    Be-     Com-    Be-                     Com-    Be-     Com-    Be-
mercial  spoke   mercial  spoke                   mercial  spoke   mercial  spoke

NVR-NS(C)        NVR-S(C)                         IVR-NS(C)        IVR-S(C)
Interactive      Systems delivering                Immersive        Immersive
video games      physical or                       systems          systems
that are         neurological                      developed for    delivering
commercially     rehabilitation                    leisure and      physical or
available        using commercial                  gaming           neurological
applications     "closed systems"                  purposes         rehabilitation
e.g., Nintendo   e.g., Khymeia                     typically        using
Wii, Microsoft   VRRS                              available        "closed systems"
Kinect, Sony                                        through          e.g., Khymeia
PlayStation                                         digital          VRRS
                                                    distribution
NVR-NS(B)        NVR-S(B)                           service
Interactive      Non-commercial                    e.g., Steam or   IVR-S(B)
games or         systems, likely                    Oculus store    Immersive
applications     unavailable,                                       interactive
using bespoke    developed to                       IVR-NS(B)       games or
non-available    specific                           Immersive       applications,
hardware and/or  rehabilitation                     interactive     using either
software         needs                              games or        bespoke non-
                                                    applications    available
                                                    developed for   hardware and/or
                                                    specific        software
                                                    rehabilitation
                                                    needs using
                                                    either bespoke
                                                    hardware and/or
                                                    software
```

**Non-immersive VR - Non-specific (NVR-NS)**

This sub-category most notably entails commercial NVR-NS(C) systems, such as the Nintendo Wii, with studies that are more easily reproducible, due to the consistency and availability of the systems and software. Likewise, the studies are frequently larger, and span a wide spectrum of patient populations. The caveat is that the systems are not developed for the target population, i.e., people with disabilities. Therefore, studies will encounter users who are not able to operate the system, which may introduce frustration and lack of motivation. Bespoke NVR-NS(B) systems within this sub-category will likely be underrepresented. We have not identified any studies using NVR-NS(B) systems.

**Non-immersive VR - Specific (NVR-S)**

Acknowledging the issues with NS systems, many studies have also utilized specifically designed systems, to tackle some of these problems. Issues with commercial NVR-S(C) systems include that they are often expensive purchases, or requiring renewable licenses. Bespoke NVR-S(B) systems are also frequently represented in the literature, however, are often designed specifically for the study and often not publicly available. Functionalities are sometimes described in great detail, but we argue, mostly not sufficiently, to reproduce and replicate findings.

**Immersive VR - Non-specific (IVR-NS)**

Similar to what the Nintendo Wii achieved in 2006, VR-headsets are now an affordable and commercial off-the-shelf solution. We therefore anticipate an increase of studies evaluating IVR-NS(C) applications within rehabilitation contexts in the near future. For example, we identified one recent publication with preliminary results [82] using the IVR-NS(C) application Beat Saber (2018). Other potential IVR-NS(C) applications currently available, could include Job Simulator (2016) or OhShape (2019). The primary challenge, similar to NVR-NS(C) systems, is how such systems are developed for users with normal function and abilities. Most likely, there will be no specific settings constructed to allow inclusivity toward "extreme users." Bespoke IVR-NS(B) systems for rehabilitation, while unlikely, could in practicality exist.

**Immersive VR - Specific (IVR-S)**

Commercial IVR-S(C) systems have been available since at least 2010 (Medica's Balance Rehabilitation Unit™ (BRU), but as with NVR-S(C) systems, IVR-S(C) systems are often expensive and are likely to require renewable license. More of these will appear, as companies with an already established brand in NVR-S(C) systems, apply "immersive modules" to their existing hardware. We expect them to acknowledge the increasing demand for such systems, for example Khymeia VRRS® [83]. Bespoke IVR-S(B) systems will also likely start to appear more frequently, both clinically and within research, which will likely create a more balanced representation between NVR and IVR systems. However, we argue that a problem with IVR-S(B), similar to NVR-S(B), is how bespoke systems are rarely commercially available, but developed and maintained in closed research ecosystems. This makes research reproducibility very challenging.

Looking at the applicability of this taxonomy, we see how a bulk of research included in this review is the adaptation of the NVR-NS(C) classified Nintendo Wii. While disheartening from an IVR review-based needs-perspective, the advantages of the Nintendo Wii's (C) classification are clear as they include availability, technological reliability, and production value. This infers that working within the (C) classifications, can provide preconditions for studies, resulting in fundamental advantages. These include how studies can prepare quickly, do not face technological inconsistencies, and can be easily and globally reproduced. Whether "NS" is ultimately a serious disadvantage, depends on how well the contextual rehabilitation needs, converge with the demands and effects of the non-specific solution. Noticeably remaining in this case example, is the role of the NVR nature of the Wii.

While IVR is a technology with high potential benefits - typically amplified from the sensation of presence, it also entails an increase in risks such as falls or injuries (e.g., from not being aware of ones' surroundings, while wearing the headset), to nausea, ocular disturbances, and disorientation, which may be negligible or severe depending on the individual participants. While (B) applications may be aimed to fit contextual needs more precisely, they may also lack the refinement and additional benefits of some (C) grade products.

IVR-NS(C) products are currently undergoing rapidly increasing development, both in terms of quantity and quality. With products such as Beat Saber and Half-Life Alyx breaking records for IVR software sales, IVR-NS(C) titles are gradually demonstrating potential for usage, across entertainment- and clinical settings. These represent a point for IVR, where their success is likely gaining more from effectively utilizing the defining features of IVR to their advantage, than they are losing from any adverse effects. Researchers and practitioners should definitely consider any apprehension, on utilizing (C) products as their vehicle to explore the viability of IVR-based rehabilitation.

This does require researchers to find proper interventions for the IVR-NS(C) applications, and to design their studies around those spaces, where their applications are therapeutically and methodologically useful. Meanwhile, as this was possible for the Nintendo Wii, it should be considered within a range of possibility for current or future IVR applications. We are still to see the IVR-NS(C) application, which achieves weight and role within IVR-based rehabilitation, as the Wii did in the past for NVR-NS(C) based rehabilitation.

Meanwhile, developing this taxonomic classification for VR systems is a starting part of this. If a non-discreet distinction between the non-immersive and immersive exists (on a continuum), the current state of RCT-descriptions of technologies pinpoint a demarcation problem of immersion. The taxonomy proposed in this review, is a layer to this. Acknowledging the placement of an intervention is important, especially based on the findings of this review, to make initial judgement on the research field it should be place.

Despite the taxonomy proposed in this review, however, more detailed classification methods remain needed to further distinguish IVR-based interventions. For example, from the usage of FOV and FOR. Currently, information about interventions are seldom sufficient enough, to use those measurements as variables.

### 4.2. Overall Completeness and Applicability of Evidence

Limited detail about the intervention was provided in the included studies, which limits the ability to replicate the research. This is especially true of specific bespoke systems. When not commercially available, and when details about hardware, software and interactions are not described in detail, bespoke systems become exceedingly difficult to include in cross-study evaluations or comparisons. Future research endeavors should carefully consider and attend to this inclusion.

### 4.3. Potential Biases in the Review Process

This systematic review verifies and supports previous suggestions in narrative reviews, where the term VR has been used inconsistently, when describing interventions. Furthermore, given that a majority of the articles are published after 2016, which correlates with the availability of high-immersive commercial and affordable VR-equipment, this review supports the need for development and evaluation of more high-quality interventions. Partly to better understand the effectiveness and adverse events of IVR-equipment in motor rehabilitation of older adults, but also in other domains where better evidence exists, such as stroke therapy [32].

Many factors contribute to the sense of the immersion (see section 1.2), thus, the dichotomous classification applied in this review is quite reductionistic. Although it can be argued that immersion exists on a continuum, the extent of interacting elements that nurtures it, curtails clear demarcations between the different features. Furthermore, classifying virtual rehabilitation systems a posteriori on a continuum, would require detailed technical descriptions (e.g., FOV, FOR, and frame-rate), which RCT-studies do not traditionally supply.

### 4.4. Limitations of This Review

To our knowledge, this is the first systematic review attempting to evaluate differences in treatment effects, by differences in the properties of the system, though subgroup analyses. However, the authors acknowledge that there are limitations to this approach. Firstly, the scope of the review spanned a variety of different outcomes, and potentially heterogeneous populations, as long as it was non-neurological rehabilitation. This raises the question about whether the data from independent studies can be validly pooled. One of the criteria for pooling data in meta-analyses, is that treatment effects are investigated for the same fundamental impairments, using similar or identical systems and comparators. While this review does include a very specific population (i.e., older adults), it differs in the purpose of the interventions, as well as the potential functional capacity of the included participants. Likewise, the comparator offered in the control groups differed from being no activity at all, to leaflet and the same exact intervention minus the digital augmentation. Therefore, the substantial heterogeneity observed, for example in TUG (I² = 68%), can be due to differences across participants, study design and outcomes, rather than sampling errors. Furthermore, the small number of included studies describing non-neurological IVR-interventions for older adults (60+), the insufficient reported reasons for dropping out, as well as a generally poor description of adverse events, do pose severe limitations. As 56% of studies did not report adverse events, however, we cannot assume there were no adverse events, simply because none were reported. Moreover, since IVR and NVR is usually pooled, safety, and feasibility of the technology may be inflated.

### 4.5. Future Directions

As VR-systems improve (e.g., wider FOV, higher pixel density, frame-rate, and resolution), the adverse symptoms experienced by many users, will likely be mitigated. However, other challenges may also be relevant to consider, when implementing IVR in rehabilitation programs. Technological innovations will need to be continuously monitored and deemed appropriate for clinical use, as new barriers may arise when new interfaces are inevitably added, as new design standards. For example, mass-market brain-computer interfaces are likely to become embedded in wearable computing devices, within a foreseeable future. Although it definitely will be a game-changer for patient monitorization during therapy, it is not unlikely that such interfaces can be considered in violation with personal data protection regulations, when placed in off-the-shelf commercial products. For researchers seeking to implement clinical VR, it may be valuable to theorize on the potential harms of the technology, and evaluate it continuously during the process. One approach to evaluating the potential harmful consequences, could be through the development of "dark logic models" [79].

In this review we have proposed a taxonomy expanding the previous distinction between specific and non-specific VR [50] to include the distinction between immersive and non-immersive VR, as well as differentiation between commercial and bespoke systems. Admittedly, the field of Virtual Rehabilitation has so far used VR as an umbrella-term. However, to avoid confusing consumers, researchers, and healthcare professionals alike, who are leading the change, the recent commercialization of VR should re-establish discussions - and reach a taxonomic consensus on whether (or not) the term of "VR" should be reserved exclusively for IVR-systems, as a subcategory of Virtual Rehabilitation.

Finally, the authors encourage that similar methods are taken, to distinguish between NVR and IVR interventions in more focused reviews, to better understand the differences in treatment effects and related adverse events. Potentially, this task can be undertaken through umbrella reviews, to synthesize results from systematic reviews, while accounting for a posteriori classifications.

## 5. Conclusion

The majority of studies included in this review evaluated the use of non-specific, commercially available NVR systems. Three of the 15 studies included in this review evaluated IVR interventions. Two of these studies met the criteria for meta-analysis. Six studies included in the meta-analysis indicated a significant treatment effect of NVR on TUG scores and BBS scores compared to the control intervention. No significant difference in 6MWT scores were found in the meta-analysis of the two studies using NVR interventions. Pain scores were significantly different for the two IVR interventions compared to control for patients, following total knee arthroplasty. Yet, no significant difference was found in pain scores between the NVR interventions and control, for people with chronic back pain or balance disorders.

We initialize a call-for-action, to distinguish between types of VR-technology, and propose a taxonomy of virtual rehabilitation systems, based on our findings. Most interventions uses NVR systems, which has demonstrably lower VR-sickness than IVR-systems. Therefore, RCT adverse events may be underreported. An increased demand for IVR-systems highlights this challenge. Care should be taken when applying the results of existing NVR tools to new IVR technologies. NVR could improve functional outcomes, and should not be underestimated, simply by the contemporary existence of IVR. Future studies should provide more detail about their interventions, and future reviews should differentiate between NVR and IVR.

### 5.1. Implications for Practice

The heterogeneity in VR intervention, participant type, study setting and outcome measures across the included studies, along with small sample sizes, provide limited ability to draw strong conclusions to support the use of VR in practice. Stakeholders and clinicians should be careful when applying the results of existing NVR interventions to new IVR technologies. While both NVR and IVR can effectively improve functional outcomes, IVR generally causes more adverse events, such as VR-sickness which can lead to higher dropout-rates, or even worse pose health-risks if patients are not properly monitored.

### 5.2. Implications for Research

Future studies should provide more detail about the equipment used in the interventions, and also better monitor, measure and report system-specific side effects through standardized tools. Future reviews should differentiate between NVR and IVR.

## Data Availability Statement

The original contributions presented in the study are included in the article/Supplementary Material, further inquiries can be directed to the corresponding author/s.

## Author Contributions

EH, JB-P, TP, and SF conceived and formulated the research questions for the study. EH drafted the a priori protocol, analyzed the data, and drafted the manuscript. SF and SH performed the literature search, identified and removed duplicate records, and prepared files for Covidence. EH and TP performed title and abstract screening as well as full-text screening, and resolved conflicts between raters. EH, TP, JB-P, KH, and NN performed independent data extraction and Risk of Bias assessment. EH, BL, and JB-P interpreted results of the data synthesis. EH, BL, JB-P, NN, SS, TP, SF, and CK edited and contributed to the manuscript. All authors reviewed and accepted the final version.

## Funding

This systematic review was funded as a joined effort between Aalborg University and VihTek Research and Test Center for Health Technologies. The systematic review was written as part of a Ph.D. study undertaken by Emil Rosenlund Høeg, funded by the municipality of Frederiksberg.

## Acknowledgments

Many thanks to Professor Hanne Tønnesen and colleagues from WHO Collaborating Centre for Evidence-based Health promotion in Hospitals and Health Services, Frederiksberg for letting me attend the already full Ph.D.-Course on Systematic Review Techniques, 2018. Without that course, this review would not have happened.

## Supplementary Material

The Supplementary Material for this article can be found online at: https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/frvir.2021.647993/full#supplementary-material

## References

1. United Nations, Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division. (2019). World Population Prospects 2019: Highlights (ST/ESA/SER.A/423). Available online at: https://population.un.org/wpp/Publications/Files/WPP2019_Highlights.pdf (accessed October 10, 2020).

2. Christensen, K., Doblhammer, G., Rau, R., and Vaupel, J. W. (2009). Ageing populations: the challenges ahead. *Lancet*, 374, 1196–1208.

3. Kennedy, B. K., Berger, S. L., Brunet, A., Campisi, J., Cuervo, A. M., Epel, E. S., et al. (2014). Geroscience: linking aging to chronic disease. *Cell*, 159, 709–713.

4. Duncan, L. R., Hall, C. R., Wilson, P. M., and Jenny, O. (2010). Exercise motivation: a cross-sectional analysis examining its relationships with frequency, intensity, and duration of exercise. *International Journal of Behavioral Nutrition and Physical Activity*, 7, 1–9.

5. Anderson, E., and Durstine, J. L. (2019). Physical activity, exercise, and chronic diseases: a brief review. *Sports Medicine and Health Science*, 1, 3–10.

6. De la Rosa, A., Olaso-Gonzalez, G., Arc-Chagnaud, C., Millan, F., Salvador-Pascual, A., Garc-a-Lucerga, C., et al. (2020). Physical exercise in the prevention and treatment of alzheimer's disease. *Journal of Sport and Health Science*, 9, 394–404.

7. Teixeira, P. J., Carraça, E. V., Markland, D., Silva, M. N., and Ryan, R. M. (2012). Exercise, physical activity, and self-determination theory: a systematic review. *International Journal of Behavioral Nutrition and Physical Activity*, 9, 1.

8. Bourbeau, J., and Bartlett, S. J. (2008). Patient adherence in COPD. *Thorax*, 63, 831–838.

9. Salinas, G. D., Williamson, J. C., Kalhan, R., Thomashow, B., Scheckermann, J. L., Walsh, J., et al. (2011). Barriers to adherence to chronic obstructive pulmonary disease guidelines by primary care physicians. *International Journal of Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease*, 6, 171–179.

10. Maclean, N., Pound, P., Wolfe, C., and Rudd, A. (2000). Qualitative analysis of stroke patients' motivation for rehabilitation. *BMJ*, 321, 1051–1054.

11. Rizzo, A. S., Lange, B., Suma, E. A., and Bolas, M. (2011). Virtual reality and interactive digital game technology: new tools to address obesity and diabetes. *Journal of Diabetes Science and Technology*, 5, 256–264.

12. Keshner, E. A., Weiss, P. T., Geifman, D., and Raban, D. (2019). Tracking the evolution of virtual reality applications to rehabilitation as a field of study. *Journal of NeuroEngineering and Rehabilitation*, 16, 76.

13. Burdea, G. (2003). Virtual rehabilitation-benefits and challenges. *Yearbook of Medical Informatics*, 12, 170–176.

14. Tieri, G., Morone, G., Paolucci, S., and Iosa, M. (2018). Virtual reality in cognitive and motor rehabilitation: facts, fiction and fallacies. *Expert Review of Medical Devices*, 15, 107–117.

15. Rothbaum, B. O., Anderson, P., Zimand, E., Hodges, L., Lang, D., and Wilson, J. (2006). Virtual reality exposure therapy and standard (in vivo) exposure therapy in the treatment of fear of flying. *Behavior Therapy*, 37, 80–90.

16. Parsons, T. D., and Rizzo, A. A. (2008). Affective outcomes of virtual reality exposure therapy for anxiety and specific phobias: a meta-analysis. *Journal of Behavior Therapy and Experimental Psychiatry*, 39, 250–261.

17. Powers, M. B., and Emmelkamp, P. M. (2008). Virtual reality exposure therapy for anxiety disorders: a meta-analysis. *Journal of Anxiety Disorders*, 22, 561–569.

18. Maples-Keller, J. L., Yasinski, C., Manjin, N., and Rothbaum, B. O. (2017). Virtual reality-enhanced extinction of phobias and post-traumatic stress. *Neurotherapeutics*, 14, 554–563.

19. Rothbaum, B. O., Hodges, L. F., Ready, D., and Alarcon, R. D. (2001). Virtual reality exposure therapy for vietnam veterans with posttraumatic stress disorder. *Journal of Clinical Psychiatry*, 62, 617–622.

20. Difede, J., Cukor, J., Jayasinghe, N., Patt, I., Jedel, S., Spielman, L., et al. (2007). Virtual reality exposure therapy for the treatment of posttraumatic stress disorder following September 11, 2001. *Journal of Clinical Psychiatry*, 68, 1639.

21. Kothgassner, O. D., Goreis, A., Kafka, J. X., Van Eickels, R. L., Plener, P. L., and Felnhofer, A. (2019). Virtual reality exposure therapy for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD): a meta-analysis. *European Journal of Psychotraumatology*, 10, 1654782.

22. Gold, J. I., Kant, A. J., Kim, S. H., et al. (2005). "Virtual anesthesia: the use of virtual reality for pain distraction during acute medical interventions," in *Seminars in Anesthesia, Perioperative Medicine and Pain*, Vol. 24, eds P. D. Lumb and D. F. McIntee (Elsevier), 203–210.

23. Hoffman, H. G., Patterson, D. R., Seibel, E., Soltani, M., Jewett-Leahy, L., and Sharar, S. R. (2008). Virtual reality pain control during burn wound debridement in the hydrotank. *Clinical Journal of Pain*, 24, 299–304.

24. Li, A., Montaño, Z., Chen, V. J., and Gold, J. I. (2011). Virtual reality and pain management: current trends and future directions. *Pain Management*, 1, 147–157.

25. Pourmand, A., Davis, S., Marchak, A., Whiteside, T., and Sikka, N. (2018). Virtual reality as a clinical tool for pain management. *Current Pain and Headache Reports*, 22, 1–6.

26. Matamala-Gomez, M., Donegan, T., Bottiroli, S., Sandrini, G., Sanchez-Vives, M. V., and Tassorelli, C. (2019). Immersive virtual reality and virtual embodiment for pain relief. *Frontiers in Human Neuroscience*, 13, 279.

27. Wittkopf, P. G., Lloyd, D. M., Coe, O., Yacoobali, S., and Billington, J. (2020). The effect of interactive virtual reality on pain perception: a systematic review of clinical studies. *Disability and Rehabilitation*, 42, 3722–3733.

28. Hoffman, H. G., Patterson, D. R., Seibel, E., Soltani, M., Jewett-Leahy, L., and Sharar, S. R. (2008). Virtual reality pain control during burn wound debridement in the hydrotank. *Clinical Journal of Pain*, 24, 299–304.

29. Rizzo, A. A., Schultheis, M., Kerns, K. A., and Mateer, C. (2004). Analysis of assets for virtual reality applications in neuropsychology. *Neuropsychological Rehabilitation*, 14, 207–239.

30. Laver, K., George, S., Ratcliffe, J., Quinn, S., Whitehead, C., Davies, O., et al. (2012). Use of an interactive video gaming program compared with conventional physiotherapy for hospitalised older adults: a feasibility trial. *Disability and Rehabilitation*, 34, 1802–1808.

31. Rose, F. D., Brooks, B. M., and Rizzo, A. A. (2005). Virtual reality in brain damage rehabilitation. *Cyberpsychology and Behavior*, 8, 241–262.

32. Laver, K. E., Lange, B., George, S., Deutsch, J. E., Saposnik, G., and Crotty, M. (2017). Virtual reality for stroke rehabilitation. *Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews*, 11, CD008349.

33. Karamians, R., Proffitt, R., Kline, D., and Gauthier, L. V. (2020). Effectiveness of virtual reality-and gaming-based interventions for upper extremity rehabilitation poststroke: a meta-analysis. *Archives of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation*, 101, 885–896.

34. Kilteni, K., Maselli, A., Kording, K. P., and Slater, M. (2015). Over my fake body: body ownership illusions for studying the multisensory basis of own-body perception. *Frontiers in Human Neuroscience*, 9, 141.

35. de Bruin, E. D., Schoene, D., Pichierri, G., and Smith, S. T. (2010). Use of virtual reality technique for the training of motor control in the elderly. *Zeitschrift für Gerontologie und Geriatrie*, 43, 229–234.

36. Garcia-Betances, R. I., Jiménez-Mixco, V., Arredondo, M. T., and Cabrera-Umpiérrez, M. F. (2015). Using virtual reality for cognitive training of the elderly. *American Journal of Alzheimer's Disease and Other Dementias®*, 30, 49–54.

37. Donath, L., Rössler, R., and Faude, O. (2016). Effects of virtual reality training (exergaming) compared to alternative exercise training and passive control on standing balance and functional mobility in healthy community-dwelling seniors: a meta-analytical review. *Sports Medicine*, 46, 1293–1309.

38. Porras, D. C., Siemonsma, P., Inzelberg, R., Zeilig, G., and Plotnik, M. (2018). Advantages of virtual reality in the rehabilitation of balance and gait: systematic review. *Neurology*, 90, 1017–1025.

39. Neri, S. G., Cardoso, J. R., Cruz, L., Lima, R. M., De Oliveira, R. J., Iversen, M. D., et al. (2017). Do virtual reality games improve mobility skills and balance measurements in community-dwelling older adults? systematic review and meta-analysis. *Clinical Rehabilitation*, 31, 1292–1304.

40. Amorim, J. S. C. D., Leite, R. C., Brizola, R., and Yonamine, C. Y. (2018). Virtual reality therapy for rehabilitation of balance in the elderly: a systematic review and meta-analysis. *Advances in Rheumatology*, 58, 18.

41. Molina, K. I., Ricci, N. A., de Moraes, S. A., and Perracini, M. R. (2014). Virtual reality using games for improving physical functioning in older adults: a systematic review. *Journal of NeuroEngineering and Rehabilitation*, 11, 156.

42. Miller, K. J., Adair, B. S., Pearce, A. J., Said, C. M., Ozanne, E., and Morris, M. M. (2014). Effectiveness and feasibility of virtual reality and gaming system use at home by older adults for enabling physical activity to improve health-related domains: a systematic review. *Age and Ageing*, 43, 188–195.

43. Reis, E., Postolache, G., Teixeira, L., Arriaga, P., Lima, M. L., and Postolache, O. (2019). Exergames for motor rehabilitation in older adults: an umbrella review. *Physical Therapy Reviews*, 24, 84–99.

44. Iosa, M., Morone, G., Fusco, A., Bragoni, M., Coiro, P., Multari, M., et al. (2012). Seven capital devices for the future of stroke rehabilitation. *Stroke Research and Treatment*, 2012, 187965.

45. Rizzo, A. S., and Koenig, S. T. (2017). Is clinical virtual reality ready for primetime? *Neuropsychology*, 31, 877–899.

46. Nilsson, N. C., Nordahl, R., and Serafin, S. (2016). Immersion revisited: a review of existing definitions of immersion and their relation to different theories of presence. *Human Technology*, 12, 108–134.

47. Slater, M. (2009). Place illusion and plausibility can lead to realistic behaviour in immersive virtual environments. *Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences*, 364, 3549–3557.

48. Slater, M., and Sanchez-Vives, M. V. (2016). Enhancing our lives with immersive virtual reality. *Frontiers in Robotics and AI*, 3, 74.

49. Deutsch, J. E., Borbely, M., Filler, J., Huhn, K., and Guarrera-Bowlby, P. (2008). Use of a low-cost, commercially available gaming console (wii) for rehabilitation of an adolescent with cerebral palsy. *Physical Therapy*, 88, 1196–1207.

50. Maier, M., Rubio Ballester, B., Duff, A., Duarte Oller, E., and Verschure, P. F. (2019). Effect of specific over nonspecific vr-based rehabilitation on poststroke motor recovery: a systematic meta-analysis. *Neurorehabilitation and Neural Repair*, 33, 112–129.

51. Sharples, S., Cobb, S., Moody, A., and Wilson, J. R. (2008). Virtual reality induced symptoms and effects (VRISE): comparison of head mounted display (HMD), desktop and projection display systems. *Displays*, 29, 58–69.

52. Kim, K., Rosenthal, M. Z., Zielinski, D. J., and Brady, R. (2014). Effects of virtual environment platforms on emotional responses. *Computer Methods and Programs in Biomedicine*, 113, 882–893.

53. Dennison, M. S., Wisti, A. Z., and D'Zmura, M. (2016). Use of physiological signals to predict cybersickness. *Displays*, 44, 42–52.

54. Chang, E., Kim, H. T., and Yoo, B. (2020). Virtual reality sickness: a review of causes and measurements. *International Journal of Human-Computer Interaction*, 36, 1658–1682.

55. Rebenitsch, L., and Owen, C. (2016). Review on cybersickness in applications and visual displays. *Virtual Reality*, 20, 101–125.

56. LaViola, J. J. (2000). A discussion of cybersickness in virtual environments. *ACM SIGCHI Bulletin*, 32, 47–56.

57. Kennedy, R. S., Lane, N. E., Berbaum, K. S., and Lilienthal, M. G. (1993). Simulator sickness questionnaire: an enhanced method for quantifying simulator sickness. *International Journal of Aviation Psychology*, 3, 203–220.

58. Dahdah, M. N., Bennett, M., Prajapati, P., Parsons, T. D., Sullivan, E., and Driver, S. (2017). Application of virtual environments in a multi-disciplinary day neurorehabilitation program to improve executive functioning using the Stroop task. *NeuroRehabilitation*, 41, 721–734.

59. Liberati, A., Altman, D. G., Tetzlaff, J., Mulrow, C., Gøtzsche, P. C., Ioannidis, J. P., et al. (2009). The PRISMA statement for reporting systematic reviews and meta-analyses of studies that evaluate health care interventions: explanation and elaboration. *Journal of Clinical Epidemiology*, 62, e1–e34.

60. The Nordic Cochrane Centre, The Cochrane Collaboration (2020). *Review Manager (RevMan) [Computer program]*. Version 5.4.

61. Higgins, J. P., and Thompson, S. G. (2002). Quantifying heterogeneity in a meta-analysis. *Statistics in Medicine*, 21, 1539–1558.

62. Kim, N. G., Yoo, C. K., and Im, J. J. (1999). A new rehabilitation training system for postural balance control using virtual reality technology. *IEEE Transactions on Rehabilitation Engineering*, 7, 482–485.

63. Duque, G., Boersma, D., Loza-Diaz, G., Hassan, S., Suarez, H., Geisinger, D., et al. (2013). Effects of balance training using a virtual-reality system in older fallers. *Clinical Interventions in Aging*, 8, 257.

64. Gianola, S., Stucovitz, E., Castellini, G., Mascali, M., Vanni, F., Tramacere, I., et al. (2020). Effects of early virtual reality-based rehabilitation in patients with total knee arthroplasty: a randomized controlled trial. *Medicine*, 99, e19136.

65. Yeşilyaprak, S. S., Yıldırım, M. Ş., Tomruk, M., Ertekin, Ö., and Algun, Z. C. (2016). Comparison of the effects of virtual reality-based balance exercises and conventional exercises on balance and fall risk in older adults living in nursing homes in turkey. *Physiotherapy Theory and Practice*, 32, 191–201.

66. Jin, C., Feng, Y., Ni, Y., and Shan, Z. (2018). Virtual reality intervention in postoperative rehabilitation after total knee arthroplasty: a prospective and randomized controlled clinical trial. *International Journal of Clinical and Experimental Medicine*, 11, 6119–6124.

67. Fu, A. S., Gao, K. L., Tung, A. K., Tsang, W. W., and Kwan, M. M. (2015). Effectiveness of exergaming training in reducing risk and incidence of falls in frail older adults with a history of falls. *Archives of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation*, 96, 2096–2102.

68. Morone, G., Paolucci, T., Luziatelli, S., Iosa, M., Piermattei, C., Zangrando, F., et al. (2016). Wii fit is effective in women with bone loss condition associated with balance disorders: a randomized controlled trial. *Aging Clinical and Experimental Research*, 28, 1187–1193.

69. Sobral Monteiro-Junior, R., Pereira de Souza, C., Lattari, E., Rocha, B. F., Mura, G., Machado, S., et al. (2015). Wii-workouts on chronic pain, physical capabilities and mood of older women: a randomized controlled double blind trial. *CNS and Neurological Disorders - Drug Targets*, 14, 1157–1164.

70. Tsang, W. W., and Fu, A. S. (2016). Virtual reality exercise to improve balance control in older adults at risk of falling. *Hong Kong Medical Journal*, 22(Suppl. 2), S19–S22.

71. Kwok, B. C., and Pua, Y. H. (2016). Effects of wiiactive exercises on fear of falling and functional outcomes in community-dwelling older adults: a randomised control trial. *Age and Ageing*, 45, 621–627.

72. Lee, S., and Shin, S. (2013). Effectiveness of virtual reality using video gaming technology in elderly adults with diabetes mellitus. *Diabetes Technology and Therapeutics*, 15, 489–496.

73. Schwenk, M., Grewal, G. S., Holloway, D., Muchna, A., Garland, L., and Najafi, B. (2016). Interactive sensor-based balance training in older cancer patients with chemotherapy-induced peripheral neuropathy: a randomized controlled trial. *Gerontology*, 62, 553–563.

74. Mugueta-Aguinaga, I., and Garcia-Zapirain, B. (2017). FRED: exergame to prevent dependence and functional deterioration associated with ageing. A pilot three-week randomized controlled clinical trial. *International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health*, 14, 1439.

75. Oesch, P., Kool, J., Fernandez-Luque, L., Brox, E., Evertsen, G., Civit, A., et al. (2017). Exergames versus self-regulated exercises with instruction leaflets to improve adherence during geriatric rehabilitation: a randomized controlled trial. *BMC Geriatrics*, 17, 77.

76. Anson, E., Ma, L., Meetam, T., Thompson, E., Rathore, R., Dean, V., et al. (2018). Trunk motion visual feedback during walking improves dynamic balance in older adults: assessor blinded randomized controlled trial. *Gait and Posture*, 62, 342–348.

77. Karanicolas, P. J., Farrokhyar, F., and Bhandari, M. (2010). Blinding: who, what, when, why, how? *Canadian Journal of Surgery*, 53, 345.

78. Cacau, L. D. A. P., Oliveira, G. U., Maynard, L. G., Araújo Filho, A. A. D., Silva Junior, W. M. D., Cerqueria Neto, M. L., et al. (2013). The use of the virtual reality as intervention tool in the postoperative of cardiac surgery. *Brazilian Journal of Cardiovascular Surgery*, 28, 281–289.

79. Bonell, C., Jamal, F., Melendez-Torres, G., and Cummins, S. (2015). Dark logic: theorising the harmful consequences of public health interventions. *Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health*, 69, 95–98.

80. nDreams (2016). *Perfect*. Available online at: https://www.oculus.com/experiences/rift/387422848047994/ (accessed December 2, 2020).

81. Saredakis, D., Szpak, A., Birckhead, B., Keage, H. A., Rizzo, A., and Loetscher, T. (2020). Factors associated with virtual reality sickness in head-mounted displays: a systematic review and meta-analysis. *Frontiers in Human Neuroscience*, 14, 96.

82. Erhardsson, M., Murphy, M. A., and Sunnerhagen, K. S. (2020). Commercial head-mounted display virtual reality for upper extremity rehabilitation in chronic stroke: a single-case design study. *Journal of NeuroEngineering and Rehabilitation*, 17, 1–14.

83. Khymeia Group. *Virtual Reality Rehabilitation System (VRRS)®*. Available online at: http://khymeia.com/en/products/vrrs/ (accessed November 14, 2020).