# DIMENSIONS AND COMPONENTS OF INFORMATION ECONOMY AS A NOVEL ECONOMY: A SYSTEMATIC REVIEW

## Abstract

**Objective of the Study:** Despite the critical role and impact of the information economy in the modern world, the dimensions and components of this multi-faceted concept remain understudied and unknown. The complexity and vagueness of information economy and its dimensions has made it challenging, especially for developing countries, to create value and wealth from the appropriate usage of information. This study aims to identify the dimensions and components of the information economy at the micro and macro level.

**Methodology/Approach:** A systematic review guided by PRISMA recommendations was carried out in which 20 papers that met the inclusion criteria were analyzed. ScienceDirect, Google Scholar, Embase, PubMed, Emerald, Scopus, Web of Science and Econlit databases were searched to find relevant English documents.

**Originality/Relevance:** This study conceptualizes and determines the dimensions and components of information economy through a systematic review of the literature.

**Main Results:** The analysis determined eight themes (i.e., dimensions) for the information economy, including human capital, economic factors, governing laws and regulations, political factors, information and communication technology, cultural factors, stakeholders, and information. These themes had a total of 15 sub-themes and 60 codes.

**Theoretical/Methodological Contribution:** This study conceptualizes information economy by identifying and defining its various dimensions and components. The results can be used to develop information economy strategies at the managerial level, especially in developing countries.

**Keywords:** Information economy. Dimensions and components. Novel economy.

## 1. Introduction

The use of appropriate and timely information promotes production, efficiency, competitiveness, usefulness, and diversity in innovation. The use of information in organizations and businesses has been considered a key factor in competitive advantage and effective development [1]. The unique characteristics of information include intangibility, inherent independence, increased value through data integration, extensibility, rapid transferability, easy production and reproduction, and infinite group usability, among others [2].

Organizations, businesses, and governments can use the information to produce value and wealth. Information can be stored and presented via various printed and digital resources such as books, journals, and databases [3]. According to the Science, Technical, Medical Association (STM), the information publication market had a value of about $10 billion in 2017, of which the US had the highest share (41%), while the share of the rest of the world was 6%. The share of the digital-book market was about $3.3 billion in 2016. The volume of the information market, including books, journals, technical information, databases, and medical software, were estimated at $27.5 billion in 2018. In 2017, the revenues of journals were 38.5%, and the revenues from the sales of books were about 12% of the total global income. Based on the estimates, for each pound of budget spent annually on public libraries, 4.40 pounds of economic benefit is gained in the UK [3].

The information economy is a concept that refers to analyzing the processes of information production, information distribution, information dissemination, and information consumption, as well as the expenditures and revenues created in this way [4]. Some experts believe that information economy is a novel concept and a new branch of economics, while others consider it an evolutionary concept following the industrial economy [5]. Several alternatives and synonym terms, such as knowledge economy, information and communication technology economy, the Internet economy, and digital economy, have been used in past studies for the information economy. Because of the variations in the definition of the information economy, there has been no common understanding of and framework for applying the term information economy in the literature [2].

Some potential benefits of information economy, compared to the economy of other goods, is the ease of sharing, low expiration date [2], reducing the monopolization power, optimal allocation of resources, increasing the accuracy of decision-making, and enhancing social efficiency, among others. The information economy has been considered a major component of a knowledge-based community [4].

Some industrialized countries use information economy to overcome some of their global financial crises, for instance, by producing and selling information resources [6]. The US Information Economy Reports indicates that information economy-related activities have contributed to a high level of GDP in developed countries. These reports indicate that information economic activities have had a rising trend in recent years, yet more than 80% of the revenues in this domain is limited to a few developed countries [7]. The Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) reported the share of GDP in 2017 to be about $80 trillion in information economy, the highest amount of which belongs to the US, Japan, and Germany, respectively. The 2030 predictions suggest that countries newly involved in the domain of information economy industry, such as China, India, Russia, and Brazil, will show remarkable growth [8].

While many developed countries obtain a significant market share of information economy to strengthen their ability to compete in the modern world [9], information economy has a small role in the economic development of developing countries. Policymakers in many developing countries have little understanding of the information economy and have not taken an active role. Developing countries face challenges regarding using the information to enter the global market to increase their competitive power on a global scale [10].

Even though the information economy can be used to provide value and wealth worldwide [6,1], there is still a lack of understanding of what information economy is as a multi-dimensional concept and what are its various dimensions and components [1,6]. Many previous studies have investigated various aspects of information economy, such as the impact of information technology on economic development [11], theoretical issues in information economy [12,13], the economy of science [14], defining information economy [15], predicting the future of information economy [16], knowledge economy [17,1], private information economy [18] and market of information economy [19].

While most existing literature emphasized the significance of information economy, none of them has conceptualized what information economy really is and the dimensions and components of this concept [19]. The current study was carried out to fill in this gap to identify the dimensions and components of the information economy. Findings can help policymakers better understand what information economy and its dimensions are and how they can be used in current or future information economic activities.

## 2. Literature Review

### 2.1. Approach to Dimensions and Components of the Information Economy

The gradual transition from a commodity economy to an information economy began in the 1960s. The historical course of global economic thought has gone through four different types of capital so far, including economic capital, human capital, social capital and information capital. Though all four types of capital had the power of mobility and movements, due to the nature of the information the speed of information capital flows is higher compared to other types of capital. The higher flows of information capital are due to the development of information and communication technology. All of these types of capital require information as the key element to create added value, ultimate demand and competitiveness. The main features of the information market include non-competitiveness, non-limitation and lack of scarcity. During the last decade, it has been tried to analyze the issue of the information economy and its features as a new and modern economy analyzing the science economy, knowledge economy, and information community separately. These concepts have sometimes been synonymous with the concepts of knowledge economy, ICT economy, Internet economy, and digital economy, but over time, each field professionally covers a specific field [20,21].

## 3. Methodology

This systematic review examined the studies relevant to the information economy to identify its components and dimensions. The five-stage manual of the University of York was adopted to conduct this study [22]. This manual includes a set of systematic and precise guidelines for designing, implementing, and reporting the results of systematic reviews. The stages of this manual are as follows: formulating the research question, identifying the relevant studies, study selection criterion, data extraction, collating and reporting the findings [23].

### 3.1. Formulating the Research Question

The first stage deals with formulating the research question for decision-making in the next stages. This study sought to answer the following question:

What are the dimensions and components of the concept of information economy?

### 3.2. Identifying the Relevant Studies

A systematic review method was used for data collection and analysis in the second stage. Using different combinations of the related words, an extensive search strategy was designed to identify relevant papers based on the research objective. An example of a search strategy in the Scopus database is as follows:

TITEL-ABS-KEY ("information economy*" OR "economy* of information" OR "economy* of knowledge*" OR "knowledge* economy*" OR "digital economy*" OR "economy* of digital" OR "information Market*" OR "Market* of information")

The search was conducted in English databases available to the researchers, including The ScienceDirect, Google Scholar, Embase, PubMed, Emerald, Scopus, Web of Science, and Econlit. **TABLE 1** includes the number of documents found in each database.

**TABLE 1: The number of documents found in each database**

| Database | Number of Documents |
|----------|-------------------|
| ScienceDirect | 120 |
| Web of Science | 220 |
| Scopus | 700 |
| Emerald | 335 |
| Econlit | 370 |
| Embase | 29 |
| PubMed | 66 |
| Google Scholar | 1450 |
| **TOTAL** | **3290** |

*Source: Data collected from databases.*

### 3.3. Study Selection Criterion

In the third stage, the inclusion criterion was specified for retrieving the relevant articles. It should be noted that the inclusion and exclusion criteria were not precisely predetermined due to the nature of the topic; instead, they were modified and revised continuously and in several steps during the process of search and upon familiarity with the literature. The only initial inclusion criterion was access to the full text of the article. Therefore, those with no full-text access were eliminated. No article type or time limit were applied. Two researchers screened the documents in three stages (based on their title, abstract, and full text), and a third researcher resolved cases of disagreement.

### 3.4. Data Extraction

In the fourth stage, the researchers extracted the data by taking the following steps: after providing a list of the eligible documents, a data extraction form was developed in Excel and used to collect relevant information. The form included two parts: bibliographical information (title, author, year of publication, place of study, etc.) and thematic concepts (dimensions and components of economy, influential factors including facilitators and inhibitors, examples of each factor, etc.). This form was modified and completed in different stages as the researchers became more familiar with the studies in one or more pilot rounds. In the fifth step, qualitative content analysis was used to analyze the papers' content. Braun and Clarke's thematic analysis method was adopted to interpret and thermalize the qualitative data of the articles. The key concepts were categorized using this method, and the main topics were identified, following the fifth stage of the study's methodology [24]. Two completely independent researchers performed this stage.

**FIGURE 1** presents a flowchart of the document selection process. In the first phase, 3290 documents were retrieved. Bibliographical information of the initial documents retrieved was transferred to EndNote X8 Reference Management Software. Next, 711 duplicates were identified and removed. Then, by reviewing the titles of the 2579 remaining documents, 2286 were eliminated due to being irrelevant to the study objectives. After that, by evaluating the abstracts of the 293 remaining documents, 65 documents were also eliminated due to being irrelevant to the study objectives, full-text unavailability, or lack of clarity in the methodology. Finally, the full texts of 85 documents were evaluated, among which 20 were ultimately included in the systematic review. All phases of document selection were conducted individually by two members of the research team, and a third researcher evaluated discrepancies. The content of 20 included documents was then thematically analyzed.

**FIGURE 1: PRISMA chart of process of article selection in the systematic review stage**

```
Identification:
- Records identified through database searching (n = 3290)
- Records after duplicates removed (n = 2579)

Screening:
- Records screened (n = 293)
- Records excluded (n = 2286) [Unrelated to IE component]

Eligibility:
- Full-text articles assessed for eligibility (n = 85)
- Excluded (n = 65): 57 = unrelated to objectives; 8 = Not full text available

Included:
- Studies included in the final review (n = 20)
```

*Source: Adapted from Moher et al. [25].*

The research team discussed the collected data and categorized them based on thematic overlaps and hierarchical relationships. First, the codes (minor concepts) and then the sub-themes were extracted. Subsequently, the relevant sub-themes were combined to form broader themes. The extracted concepts were examined by two individuals other than the research team. The themes and sub-themes were labelled based on the meanings identified in the examined documents. The researchers prioritized the themes and sub-themes based on their degree of importance and frequency in the analyzed documents.

## 4. Results

The thematic analysis of the retrieved documents revealed eight themes for information economy: human capital, economic factors, governing laws and regulations, political factors, information and communication technology, cultural factors, stakeholders, and information. These themes had a total of 15 sub-themes and 60 codes.

**TABLE 2: Dimensions and components of information economics**

| Dimensions and Components | Number of References | Relative Frequency Percentage |
|--------------------------|---------------------|------------------------------|
| Information and communication technology | 19 | 95% |
| Governing laws and regulations | 16 | 80% |
| Cultural factors | 15 | 75% |
| Human capital | 13 | 65% |
| Economic factors | 13 | 65% |
| Information | 11 | 55% |
| Political factors | 7 | 35% |
| Stakeholders | 3 | 15% |

*Source: From authors' authority.*

**TABLE 2** indicates the relative frequency percentages for each dimension. Due to overlaps between concepts and repetitions of concepts in the literature, we used the frequency percentage formula. It was calculated by dividing the number of references related to each component by the total number of references included in the review (N=20), multiplied by 100 [26]. The information and communication technology dimension received the highest relative frequency percentage, and stakeholders received the lowest relative frequency percentage.

### 4.1. Information and Communication Technology (ICT)

The success in achieving information economy goals depends on the level of access to information and communication technologies [2,21,6,27]. The two sub-themes of ICT are large-scale policymaking and education (**TABLE 3**).

### 4.2. Large-Scale Policymaking

Large-scale policymaking is a sub-theme identified for information and communication technology, which refers to facilitating public access to technology and optimizing the quality of the produced information [21,6,28]. This sub-theme comprises five codes: the government's large-scale policymaking for developing technological infrastructure [6,10], equalizing access to technology [6,28], optimizing the quality of information goods and services [20,21], lack of finance concentration in particular regions [2,29], and facilitating knowledge analysis and information production by developing information and communication technology [21,28] (**TABLE 3**).

### 4.3. Education

Education is a sub-theme identified for information and communication technology. It refers to teaching technology to advance the growth of the information economy [2,29]. Five codes were identified for this sub-theme: reducing the educational gap and facilitating access to educational materials to learn technology [2,30], equalizing access to technology [6,27], promoting digital literacy [2,30], and creating novel scientific infrastructure [21,31] (**TABLE 3**).

**TABLE 3: Sub-themes and codes of theme "information and communication technology"**

| Theme | Sub-theme | Code | Selected References |
|-------|-----------|------|-------------------|
| Information and communication technology | Large-scale policymaking | Governmental policies about information and communication technology development | [6,28] |
| | | Large-scale policymaking to equalize access to information and communication technology in different geographical areas | [21,31] |
| | | Policymaking to optimize the quality of information goods and services via technology | [20,21] |
| | | Large-scale policymaking against finance concentration in special regions pertaining to information technology | [2,29] |
| | | Facilitating information production by developing information and communication technology | [21,28] |
| | Education | Reducing educational gaps in learning technology skills | [2,30] |
| | | Promoting digital literacy | [2,30] |
| | | Equalizing access to technology | [27,6,30,31] |
| | | Facilitating access to educational materials to learn technology | [2,30] |
| | | Creating novel scientific infrastructure | [2,11,21,31] |

*Source: From authors' authority.*

### 4.4. Governing Laws and Regulations

Governing laws and regulations were another important dimension of the information economy. Laws and regulations can affect various aspects of economy, including information economy [32,11]. This theme had two sub-themes of supporting laws and regulations [6,31] and intellectual property laws [2,21,27], comprising 6 codes (**TABLE 4**).

### 4.5. Supportive Laws and Programs

These programs refer to laws enacted and supported by the government to support the growth of information economy. They can include essential items such as democracy, corruption control, free trade development, and supporting the laws of the information market. Of course, these laws need sanction for implementation [2,11]. This sub-theme consists of five codes: quality of the governing rules [6,31], the existence of democracy [6,11] and lack of discrimination [21,31], corruption control [11,31], and free trade development [21] and growth in the information economy market [2,21] (**TABLE 4**).

### 4.6. Intellectual Property Right

Intellectual property was another sub-theme identified for the theme of governing laws and regulations. It is, in fact, an essential tool for all goods, including information, and significantly contributes to the market rules [32,27]. This major sub-theme comprises one code supporting intellectual property rights [32,28,27], which warrants severe supervisory measures in the information economy market (**TABLE 4**).

**TABLE 4: Sub-themes and codes of the theme "laws and regulations governing"**

| Theme | Sub-theme | Code | Selected References |
|-------|-----------|------|-------------------|
| Governing laws and regulations | Supportive laws and programs | Promoting the quality of regulations governing the information economy market | [2] |
| | | Existence of democracy and lack of discrimination in the information economy market | [11] |
| | | Controlling corruption in the information economy market | [21] |
| | | Free trade development and growth in the information economy market | [1] |
| | | Regulations supporting the market of information goods and services | [2,21,33] |
| | Intellectual property right | Supporting intellectual property right | [2,27,32,28,21] |

*Source: From authors' authority.*

### 4.7. Cultural Factors

Cultural factors were another theme identified in this study. Cultural contexts, social structures, and the norms of society affect the information economy. Culture influences people's thinking and performance, for instance, when they use technologies [6]. Inventions, innovation, and creativity are significant factors for knowledge and information products that merit attention in the context of culture [34]. This theme comprises the sub-theme of culture and social structures governing society [2,35] and four codes (**TABLE 5**).

### 4.8. Culture, Social Structures Governing the Society

This refers to the beliefs and attitudes of people of different social ranks concerning understanding the concept of information economy [1]. This sub-theme consists of four codes: policymakers' [6,1] and individuals' attitudes [6,34] and views about information economy [35], level of acceptance and use of information and communication technology by individuals [6,1], development of a culture of creativity and innovation in society [6], and an emphasis on promoting a culture of economic information usage [2,6] (**TABLE 5**).

**TABLE 5: Sub-themes and codes of theme "cultural factors"**

| Theme | Sub-theme | Code | Selected References |
|-------|-----------|------|-------------------|
| Cultural factors | Culture social structures govern the society | Policymakers' and individuals' attitudes and views about the information economy and its necessity | [6,1,36] |
| | | Level of acceptance and use of information and communication technology by individuals | [6,1,34] |
| | | Development of a culture of creativity and innovation in society to generate knowledge and information | [6,2] |
| | | Promoting a culture of economic information usage | [4,2,32] |

*Source: From authors' authority.*

### 4.9. Human Capital

Human capital was another key theme for the concept of information economy. Human capital in the information economy refers to a wide range of people, including policymakers and human forces, who produce information and knowledge [4]. This theme comprises three sub-themes of people's cognition, skills and experiences, comprising 14 codes (**TABLE 6**).

### 4.10. Cognition

Cognition was a sub-theme identified for human capital. It refers to mental processes regarding the concepts of information economy [35,1]. Cognition consists of four codes of recognizing and understanding: the concepts related to information economy, its importance and necessity, recognizing the information goods [1] and items market [35], and recognizing the importance of creativity [33,35] and innovation to produce knowledge and information [2]. The reviewed documents stressed the promotion of these factors (**TABLE 6**).

### 4.11. Attitude

Attitude refers to people's, such as policymakers', views of the importance of information economy [18]. Attitude consists of three sub-themes of attitude towards the importance of indigenous knowledge and information [2,6], people's educational levels [2,6], and the intellectual capital as a factor for information production [2,4].

### 4.12. Skills and Experiences

The production and commercialization of knowledge and information require a set of skills and experiences [32,21]. This sub-theme had seven codes: educational skills [2], communication skills between experts and policymakers [2,31], the skill of using information and communication technology [6,34], personal experiences [6], digital literacy skills, technical skills [6,31], and continuous education as human capital for knowledge and information production and commercialization, which should constantly be promoted [31,34] (**TABLE 6**).

**TABLE 6: Sub-themes and codes of theme "human capital"**

| Theme | Sub-theme | Code | Selected References |
|-------|-----------|------|-------------------|
| Human capital | Cognition | Promoting the cognition of concepts related to information economy | [1,36,33,4] |
| | | Increasing understanding and perception of the importance and necessity of information economy | [1,36,33,4] |
| | | Increasing understanding and perception of the information goods and items market | [1,36,33,4] |
| | | Promoting cognition of creativity and innovation to generate knowledge and information | [2,1,11,30] |
| | Attitude | Promoting attitude towards the importance of local knowledge and information | [2,37] |
| | | Promoting policymakers' attitude to facilitate educational conditions for information generation | [2,6] |
| | | Promoting attitudes towards intellectual capital to generate information | [2,4,30] |
| | Skills and experiences | Increasing educational skills pertaining to knowledge and information generation and commercialization | [2,30,31] |
| | | Increasing communication skills between experts and policymakers for knowledge and information generation and commercialization | [31,2] |
| | | Increasing the skill of using information and communication technology for information generation and commercialization | [6,11,34] |
| | | Paying attention to personal experiences pertaining to knowledge and information generation and commercialization | [6] |
| | | Increasing digital literacy skills for knowledge and information generation and commercialization | [6,11] |
| | | Increasing technical skills for knowledge and information generation and commercialization | [6,11,34] |
| | | Continuous education pertaining to knowledge and information generation and commercialization | [2,6,37] |

*Source: From authors' authority.*

### 4.13. Economic Factors

There is a direct relationship between information economy and economic growth, such that an increase in capital raises knowledge and information production as a product [2,4]. This theme comprised three sub-themes: policymaking, infrastructure, and administrative and executive processes, with 7 codes (**TABLE 7**).

### 4.14. Policymaking

This theme refers to large-scale policymaking for promoting the effectiveness of information economy to produce information and knowledge [2,35]. Policymaking had three codes of large-scale information economy policies, policymaking to increase the effectiveness of information economy factors, and systematic budget planning to facilitate information production [2,34] (**TABLE 7**).

### 4.15. Infrastructure

Infrastructure refers to providing preliminary facilities or items needed for implementing a concept or project [2,6], which may include practical and subjective concepts. This sub-theme comprised two codes of facilitating the investment process for information production and optimization structurally and non-structurally and increasing the cost-benefit of the information market [2,6,34] (**TABLE 7**).

### 4.16. Administrative-Executive Processes

This was another sub-theme identified for economic factors. These processes are associated with information economy growth and help its optimization. They can include a wide range, from increasing incentives and stimulants to maintaining balance in pricing in the market [2,6,34]. This sub-theme consisted of four codes of increasing financial incentives for information production, facilitating the stimulants of information economy growth, controlling inflation and stabilizing the information market for market growth, and maintaining balance in information item pricing [2,21] (**TABLE 7**).

**TABLE 7: Sub-themes and codes of theme "economic factors"**

| Theme | Sub-theme | Code | Selected References |
|-------|-----------|------|-------------------|
| Economic factors | Policymaking | Paying more attention to large-scale information economy policies | [2,34] |
| | | Policymaking to increase the effectiveness of economic factors of information (qualitative and quantitative information optimization) | [2,34] |
| | | Existence of systematic budget planning to facilitate information generation | [36] |
| | Infrastructure | Facilitating the investment process for information generation and optimization structurally and non-structurally | [2,4] |
| | | Increasing the cost-effectiveness of the information market | [2,4] |
| | Administrative-executive processes | Increasing financial incentives for information generation | [2,4,6] |
| | | Facilitating the stimulants of information economy growth | [2,4,6] |
| | | Controlling inflation and stabilizing the information market for market growth | [2,4,6] |
| | | Maintaining balance in information item pricing | [2,21] |

*Source: From authors' authority.*

### 4.17. Information

Another theme identified upon the review of the texts was information. Knowing economic behaviors and habits is a major information economy factor in information marketing. Knowledge and information are the main factors in the growth, wealth, and employment in all domains [10,4]. Based on the results, the information theme comprises four sub-themes of information production, distribution networks, dissemination, and market, with 10 codes (**TABLE 8**).

### 4.18. Information Production

Information production is a sub-theme identified for the theme of information. It refers to any activity to promote information and information items [29,30]. Information production comprises four codes of quantitative and qualitative increase [30], the amount of capital needed for information production, the produced information being public and accessible, and the existing information infrastructure [32,30] (**TABLE 8**).

### 4.19. Information Distribution Networks

Another sub-theme for information was information distribution networks. We mean a platform through which the produced information and information goods enter the distribution channels by information distribution networks. There is a constant emphasis on the quality of infrastructure distribution infrastructure [32,4]. Infrastructure distribution networks comprise two codes of the ease of distribution of the produced information [33,4] and the quality of information distribution infrastructure [32] (**TABLE 8**).

### 4.20. Information Marketing

Another sub-theme for information was information marketing. Information marketing refers to a process whereby the produced information and information goods enter the market to be sold. In information marketing, the emphasis falls on examining the market status and needs assessment for the information and information items market [5,4]. Information marketing consists of two codes, examining the market status and needs assessment of the information and information item market [33,31] (**TABLE 8**).

### 4.21. Information Dissemination

Information dissemination was another sub-theme identified for information. Information dissemination means a process whereby the produced information is disseminated. Here, there is an emphasis on the ease of access to information and access to the produced information and information goods [32,4]. Information dissemination consists of two codes, ease of information dissemination and ease of access to information [29,4] (**TABLE 8**).

**TABLE 8: Sub-themes and codes of theme "informational factors"**

| Theme | Sub-theme | Code | Selected References |
|-------|-----------|------|-------------------|
| Information | Information generation | Increasing the quality and quantity of information generation | [29,33,4,11,30,32,31] |
| | | The generated information is public and accessible | [29,33,4,11,30,32,31] |
| | | Amount of capital needed for information generation | [29,33,4,11,30,32,31] |
| | | Existing information infrastructure | [29,33,4,11,30,32,31] |
| | Distribution networks | Ease of distribution of the generated information | [33,4] |
| | | Quality of information distribution infrastructure | [32] |
| | Information marketing | Examining the status of the information and information item market | [33,31] |
| | | Needs Assessment of the information and information item market | [33,31] |
| | Information dissemination | Ease of information dissemination | [29,4] |
| | | Ease of access to information | [29,4] |

*Source: From authors' authority.*

### 4.22. Political Factors

Another theme identified upon the review of texts was political factors. The reviewed texts stress that attention should be paid to large-scale policies without distinction and adherence to financial and social justice [2,29]. These concepts can be viewed in the theme of political factors. The findings identified a sub-theme (stability despite dynamism) and two codes (**TABLE 9**).

### 4.23. Stability Despite the Dynamism

Based on the literature review, political stability is a significant factor in information economy. Political factors should be constant (i.e., should not change with conditions and individuals) while being dynamic (i.e., have sufficient flexibility with changes in technology) [1,27]. For this sub-theme, two codes were identified: political stability governing the society and the dynamism and effectiveness of the policies governing the society to create an environment conducive to information economy growth [1,34,27] (**TABLE 9**).

**TABLE 9: Sub-themes and codes of theme "political factors"**

| Theme | Sub-theme | Code | Selected References |
|-------|-----------|------|-------------------|
| Political factors | Stability despite dynamism | Increasing the political stability of the society to create an environment conducive to information economy growth | [2,1,34,21] |
| | | The dynamism and effectiveness of the policies governing the society to create an environment conducive to information economy growth | [2,1,34,21] |

*Source: From authors' authority.*

### 4.24. Stakeholders

Another significant theme for the concept of information economy was stakeholders. Stakeholders are factors affecting the information economy and should be identified, but this identification is not always easy. Stakeholders include various information producers, supplies, retailers, and consumers [4]. For this theme, two sub-themes of producers and consumers of information by four codes were identified (**TABLE 10**).

### 4.25. Information Producers

Information producers are real or legal entities that produce and supply information and information goods and services [4,28]. The sub-theme of information producers includes two codes of information goods and service producers and suppliers (governments, institutions, individuals, and other stakeholders) [29,28] (**TABLE 10**).

### 4.26. Information Consumers

Information consumers are real or legal entities that consume or retail information goods and services [29,4]. The sub-theme of information consumers includes two codes of information goods and services consumers and retailers (governments, institutions, and other stakeholders) [29,4,28].

**TABLE 10: Sub-themes and codes of "stakeholders of the information economy"**

| Theme | Sub-theme | Code | Selected References |
|-------|-----------|------|-------------------|
| Stakeholders | Information producers | Producers of information goods and services, including governments, institutions, individuals, and other stakeholders | [29,4,28] |
| | | Suppliers of information goods and services, including governments, institutions, individuals, and other stakeholders | [29,4,28] |
| | Information consumers | Consumers of information goods and services, including governments, institutions, individuals, and other stakeholders | [29,4,28] |
| | | Retailers of information goods and services, including institutions, individuals, and other stakeholders | [29,4,28] |

*Source: From authors' authority.*

## 5. Discussion

The results of this review revealed eight dimensions for the information economy. The most important dimension was information and communication technology, followed by governing laws and regulations, cultural factors, human and economic factors, information, political factors, and stakeholders.

Most studies examined one or more themes by emphasizing the practical aspects of the information economy, and there was no comprehensive view entailing all the factors affecting the information economy. Investigations into the practical factors were dispersed, and there was no study to comprehensively present all the relevant components and dimensions in a systematic and categorized manner. The majority of studies have examined information technology and the laws and regulations governing them and their effects on information [6,18,38] economy. Some studies have also focused on economic, human factors, information, stakeholders, and cultural factors separately, along with other themes [2,39,31].

The most critical theme highlighted in most studies were information and communication technology. Different studies stressed the effect of information and communication technology as a factor influencing the growth of the information economy and facilitating processes. Studies have also recommended reinforcing technological infrastructure, provision of education, and skills acquisition as factors facilitating competition in developing countries [15,14]. The pivotal and undeniable role of technology for facilitating information production, collection, and dissemination cycle has always been stressed [6,7,14], and its role is prominent in the information market to reduce the digital gap [6]. The literature discussed essential points pertaining to technology; however, little attention has been paid to the key role of policymaking in different technology domains.

Meanwhile, policymaking can be the bedrock for forming factors associated with information and communication technology. This is in line with the results obtained from Billon et al.'s study [6].

The studies mentioned political instability, chaos, ineffective governance, inflation, and unemployment as negative signals in the information market. The quality of the governing institution, including dynamism, quality of laws and regulations, degree of corruption control, attention to intellectual property rights, and governmental effectiveness, were also stressed. Political stability, democracy, and press freedom were the other highlighted factors [2,11,10]. Some studies have also noted high-quality laws and regulations, GDP, governmental revenues and expenditures, and the role of the government in facilitating the information economy [10]. Among information economy themes, the governing laws and regulations ranked second in importance and have been greatly emphasized in the reviewed studies directly or indirectly [2,11,10]. This theme plays a major role in the information economy and is recommended to keep in mind constantly. The majority of the studies emphasize all the sub-themes and codes of this theme, indicating its prominent role in information economy. Studies by Mohaghegh, Asongu, and Andrés also testify to this [10,2,11,10].

Despite the salient role of cultural factors in the information economy and the great emphasis on their significance in the literature, little attention has been paid to all its components, which are dispersedly examined in different articles [11,10]. Meanwhile, attention to all the sub-theme and codes of this wide-ranging theme (e.g., promoting the culture of economic information usage) can open up an economic view of information, from higher-level policymakers to information producers and users [35,1]. A few studies also considered cultural factors and human capital as a unified concept [40,41]; however, attention to their sub-themes and codes indicated that these two denote separate, albeit closely related, themes.

Some studies have focused on identifying human capital as a major factor in this domain. There was a constant emphasis on the mutual relationship between knowledge (as the driving force for innovation and creativity) and the prosperity of information economy [35,1]. Some studies had also mentioned indigenous knowledge, intellectual capital, and intellectual property rights as factors affecting the growth of information economy and noted innovation, education, and technology as the most basic cultural foundations [42,30]. The studies rarely discussed cognition and attitude [2], which form the basis of human capital or have implicitly and sparsely mentioned them without any particular emphasis. People's understanding and attitude play a major role in the commencement and continuation of the movement towards the desired objectives. In one study, the intellectual property right was introduced along with human capital [43]; nevertheless, since intellectual property rights should be enacted and followed by the governing institutions, based on most studies, it belongs to the theme of governing laws and regulations despite its relationship with human capital [42,30].

As for economic factors, studies have highlighted economic prosperity, inflation, financial development, and government expenditures as components with positive or negative impacts on the growth of information economy [1,4]. Some studies have also emphasized economic infrastructure [44], while others highlighted the effective role of economic factors and correct investment in information economy for future progress [2,21,6,29,1,4]. The studies mentioned the fundamental role of large-scale policymaking to increase information and knowledge production optimization, the existence of systematic planning, and increasing cost-effectiveness as major factors in the market of the information economy. This issue has also been emphasized in studies such as Asongu, Baseri, Billon, Carayannis, Engelbrecht, and Niyato [2,21,6,29,1,4].

Some studies have also examined the production, distribution and dissemination chain; information organization and retrieval (examples for the theme of information and stakeholders) together as a unified theme affecting the information economy. Few studies have discussed the details of the theme of information, and most of them pointed only to the generalities [2,21,6,29,1,4]. Nevertheless, information has a close tie to its sub-themes and codes, neglecting which would reduce the quality of information presented to the information market. Alvarez and his colleague mentioned this in their study [32,28,27]. In a few studies, the themes of information and stakeholders were regarded as a unified theme [2,21,6,29,1,4]; however, despite the strong correlation between them, the researchers concluded that these were separate themes based on their sub-themes, codes, and the studied documents.

Some studies noted the importance of politics as a significant theme in an information economy [1]. This can be a fundamental theme for the information economy and affect other themes. This is in line with the results obtained. This is in line with the results obtained from Engelbrecht et al.'s study [1].

Stakeholders was another important theme that had been neglected or just touched in the studies together with information [4,28]. Stakeholders are a major foundation of information economy and should be highlighted throughout the information cycle, from production to consumption. As information producers or consumers, stakeholders play a key role in information economy. The produced information and information goods, and all the related items, will finally be delivered to the stakeholders who decide about the quality of the produced information and information goods, their purchase, or use. This is in line with the results obtained from Carayannis Elias et al.'s study [29].

In general, in the literature review, the researchers encountered implicitly, sparsely, or briefly noted cases. Still, we attempted to extract as many themes and codes as possible from the documents and categorize them appropriately. There is overlap and interrelation among the themes and codes of information economy, and some cases could be assigned to more than one theme. This interrelation causes ambiguities for the researchers, who then decided to distinguish the themes, sub-themes, and codes based on their repetitions in the majority of texts, to enhance transparency. A systematic classification in this domain reduces the ambiguities of the nature of the information economy, which is a major contemporary economic issue; it also facilitates small- and large-scale decision-making by planners, policymakers, and researchers. This seems to be the first study to determine the components and dimensions of information economy by a comprehensive literature review.

## 6. Conclusion

This research aimed to clarify the dimensions and components of this type of economy as a prominent world economy, which seems to have been successful and yielded favorable results. The study revealed eight themes for information economy: human capital, economic factors, governing laws and regulations, political factors, information and communication technology, cultural factors, stakeholders, and information. Several sub-themes were also identified for each theme to improve our knowledge about the information economy.

Identified themes and components of the information economy can help managers, policymakers, and other individuals make better and more efficient decision-making in this highly competitive field worldwide. Using the themes and subthemes identified in this study can help implement programs to improve the market and economic information.

While most studies on the information economy are conducted in developing countries, it is necessary to carry out similar studies in developed countries. This would help them evaluate their current status, identify best practices and challenges, and develop better policies and plans for benefiting from the information economy. Moreover, conducting qualitative studies to evaluate affective factors in the information economy through interviews with experts, policymakers and stakeholders in different countries is critical.

### 6.1. Limitations

One limitation of this study was the lack of access to relevant literature. We attempted to mitigate this limitation by expanding the search strategy to incorporate more resources.

**TABLE 11: Authors' contributions**

| Contribution | Panahi, S | Nemati-Anaraki, A | Kouhsari, A | Alipour, V | Abdolahi, L |
|-------------|-----------|-----------------|-------------|------------|------------|
| Contextualization | ✓ | - | - | - | - |
| Methodology | - | ✓ | ✓ | - | - |
| Software | - | - | - | - | - |
| Validation | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | - |
| Formal analysis | ✓ | - | - | ✓ | ✓ |
| Investigation | ✓ | - | - | - | ✓ |
| Resources | ✓ | - | - | - | ✓ |
| Data curation | ✓ | - | ✓ | - | ✓ |
| Original draft | ✓ | - | ✓ | ✓ | - |
| Revision and editing | ✓ | ✓ | - | - | - |
| Viewing | - | - | ✓ | ✓ | - |
| Supervision | ✓ | - | - | - | - |
| Project management | ✓ | - | - | - | - |
| Obtaining funding | ✓ | - | - | - | ✓ |

## Acknowledgment

This work is part of a thesis for the PhD degree in Medical Library and Information science supported and founded by the Iran University of Medical Science, NO:IUMS.SHMIS-97-4-37-14288 and with the Ethical Code:IR.IUMS.REC.1398.377.

## References

1. Engelbrecht, H. J. (2015). Information, capital, well-being. *Prometheus, 33*(4), 347–359. https://doi.org/10.1080/08109028.2016.1194007

2. Asongu, S. A., & Andrés, A. R. (2019). Trajectories of knowledge economy in SSA and MENA countries. *Technology in Society*, 101119. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techsoc.2019.03.002

3. Johnson, R., Watkinson, A., & Mabe, M. (2018). *The STM report: An overview of scientific and scholarly publishing*. International Association of Scientific, Technical and Medical Publishers, 1–214.

4. Niyato, D., Lu, X., Wang, P., Kim, D. I., & Han, Z. (2016). Economics of Internet of Things: An information market approach. *IEEE Wireless Communications, 23*(4), 136–145. https://doi.org/10.1109/MWC.2016.7553037

5. Fox, R. (2018). Information economy. *Digital Library Perspectives, 34*(2), 78–83. https://doi.org/10.1108/DLP-10-2017-0040

6. Billon, M., Lera-Lopez, F., & Marco, R. (2016). ICT use by households and firms in the EU: Links and determinants from a multivariate perspective. *Review of World Economics, 152*(4), 629–654. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10290-016-0259-8

7. Raghfar, H., Shahabadi, A., & Alizadeh, S. (2018). The effects of knowledge-based economy's components on entrepreneurship in a group of selected countries. *Tahghighate Eghtesadi, 53*(123), 323–344. https://doi.org/10.22059/JTE.2017.235216.1007617

8. Woodward, R. (2016). *The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD)*. Routledge. https://doi.org/10.4324/9780203875773

9. Pressman, S. (2013). *Fifty major economists*. Routledge.

10. Mohaghegh, A. (2016). Move toward economic globalization with a scientist. *Procedia Economics and Finance, 36*, 467–479. https://doi.org/10.1016/S2212-5671(16)30070-3

11. De La Paz-Marín, M., Gutiérrez, P. A., & Hervás-Martínez, C. (2015). Classification of countries' progress toward a knowledge economy based on machine learning classification techniques. *Expert Systems with Applications, 42*(1), 562–572. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2014.08.008

12. Dyani, N., & Pirmand, M. (2001). Theoretical issues in information economy. *Journal of Economic Research, 16*(47), 29–51.

13. Mohseni, M. (2001). Theoretical foundations of information economy. *Economic Studies Quarterly, 8*(2), 112–135.

14. Zinali, M. (2018). An overview of information economics texts. *Electronic Journal of Astan Quds Razavi Libraries, Museums and Documentation Organization, 9*(36), 1–24. http://shamseh.aqr-libjournal.ir/article_58522_3d70499db770f7bb81a4659a18839431.pdf

15. Vafopoulos, M. N. (2012). The web economy: Goods, users, models, and policies. *Foundations and Trends® in Web Science, 3*(1–2), 1–136. http://dx.doi.org/10.1561/1800000015

16. Slaughter, S. (1996). Predicting the future of information economy. *Journal of Future Studies, 4*(2), 45–67.

17. Adler, P. S. (2001). Knowledge economy: Concepts and implications. *Management Science, 47*(3), 345–362.

18. Bolhari, A., & Mosavi Jahromi, M. (2016). The role of information technology in revealing market information. In *Symmetric and asymmetric information* (pp. 29–85). Samt.

19. Rinaldi, A., et al. (2013). Market of information economy: A systematic review. *Journal of Information Economics, 12*(3), 89–104.

20. Babazade, M., & Vafaei, M. (2016). The effect of information and communication trade on economic growth in Iran and selected developing countries. Paper presented at the Fourth National Conference on Management, Economics and Accounting, East Azarbaijan Industrial Management Organization, Tabriz, Iran.

21. Baseri, B., & Kia, M. (2011). The comparative analysis of knowledge based economy components on economic growth in some selected countries. *Iranian Journal of Economic Research, 16*(47), 29–51.

22. Colquhoun, H. L., Levac, D., O'Brien, K. K., Straus, S., Tricco, A. C., Perrier, L., & Moher, D. (2014). Scoping reviews: Time for clarity in definition, methods, and reporting. *Journal of Clinical Epidemiology, 67*(12), 1291–1294. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclinepi.2014.03.013

23. Arksey, H., & O'Malley, L. (2005). Scoping studies: Towards a methodological framework. *International Journal of Social Research Methodology, 8*(1), 19–32. https://doi.org/10.1080/1364557032000119616

24. Pawson, R. (2002). Evidence-based policy: The promise of 'realist synthesis'. *Evaluation, 8*(3), 340–358. https://doi.org/10.1177/135638902401462448

25. Moher, D., Shamseer, L., Clarke, M., Ghersi, D., Liberati, A., Petticrew, M., ... & Stewart, L. A. (2015). Preferred reporting items for systematic review and meta-analysis protocols (PRISMA-P) 2015 statement. *Systematic Reviews, 4*(1), 1. https://doi.org/10.1186/2046-4053-4-1

26. Delavar, A. (2003). *Research methods in psychology and educational sciences*. Roshd Publication.

27. Zhang, J. T. (2019). Emociones y consumo de los internautas en la economía digital China. *Revista Latinoamericana De Estudios Sobre Cuerpos Emociones Y Sociedad*, (30), 89–98. http://www.relaces.com.ar/index.php/relaces/article/view/118/113

28. Yaghoobi, A. (2014). The role of information economics on the world economy. *Rasaneh, 24*(2), 71.

29. Carayannis, E. G., Ferreira, J. J. M., Jalali, M. S., & Ferreira, F. A. F. (2018). MCDA in knowledge-based economies: Methodological developments and real world applications. *Technological Forecasting and Social Change, 131*, 1–3. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2018.01.028

30. Popova, E. A., Medyakova, E. M., & Martemyanova, Z. S. (2018). Improving the staff development institutions under digital economy conditions. In *Prague: Central Bohemia University* (Vol. 6, pp. 399–404). https://doi.org/10.12955/cbup.v6.1189

31. Emadzadeh, M., & Shahnazi, R. A. (2008). A study of fundamental and indices of knowledge based economy (Comparing Iran with three groups candidate countries). *Economic Research, 7*(4), 143–175.

32. Alvarez Leon, L. F. (2016). *Assembling digital economies: Geographic information markets and intellectual property regimes in the United States and the European Union* [Doctoral dissertation, University of California, Los Angeles]. ProQuest Dissertations & Theses Global.

33. Arefeh, M. (2016). Move toward economic globalization with a scientist. *Procedia Economics and Finance, 36*, 467–479. https://doi.org/10.1016/S2212-5671(16)30070-3

34. MohammadAfshar, A., Hoque, M. R., & Alam, K. (2018). An empirical investigation of the relationship between e-government development and the digital economy: The case of Asian countries. *Journal of Knowledge Management, 23*(5), 1176–1200. http://dx.doi.org/10.1108/JKM-10-2017-0477

35. Ba, S., & Nault, B. R. (2017). Emergent themes in the interface between economics of information systems and management of technology. *Production and Operations Management, 26*(4), 652–666. https://doi.org/10.1111/poms.12644

36. Sulin, P., & Barrie, G. (2017). Digital transformation and information economy: A comparative study. *Journal of Global Information Management, 25*(3), 112–128.

37. Ogundeinde, T., & Ejohwomu, O. (2016). Indigenous knowledge systems and information economy in Africa. *African Journal of Library and Information Science, 26*(2), 89–102.

38. Nadezhda, N., Nagovitsyna, E., Lapteva, I., Shchinova, R. A., & Koikova, T. (2018). The necessity for developing the integrated system of economic information on the bank services market in the conditions of globalization. *Espacios, 39*(28), 1–12.

39. Eltemasi, M. (2015). Information economy based on knowledge organization systems, with emphasis on Folksonomy: Dissertation of academic libraries. *Information Sciences & Technology, 30*(4), 923–937.

40. Gladilin, A. V., Dotdueva, Z. S., Klimovskikh, Y. A., Labovskaya, Y. V., & Sharunova, E. V. (2018). Establishment of information economy under the influence of scientific and technical progress. In *Perspectives on the use of new information and communication technology (ICT) in the modern economy* (pp. 46–55). Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-90835-9_6

41. Vigani, M., & Olper, A. (2013). GMO standards, endogenous policy and the market for information. *Food Policy, 43*, 32–43. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodpol.2013.08.001

42. Hayriye, A. (1999). The characteristics of the information economy. *Balıkesir Üniversitesi Sosyal Bilimler Enstitüsü Dergisi, 2*(3), 120–140.

43. Titova, O. V., Kostyukova, E. I., Boboshko, N. M., & Drachena, I. P. (2019). New types of taxes and forms of taxation in the conditions of information economy: Perspectives of optimization. In *Optimization of the taxation system: Preconditions, tendencies and perspectives* (pp. 229–235). Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01514-5_26

44. Ordóñez de Pablos, P., Lytras, M. D., Visvizi, A., & Zhang, X. (2019). Opportunities for information technologies and knowledge management to answer emerging challenges for manufacturing and services industries in the digital economy. *Human Factors and Ergonomics in Manufacturing, 29*(1), 3. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/hfm.20786