# Augmented Reality Marketing: A Systematic Literature Review and an Agenda for Future Inquiry

## Abstract

Augmented reality (AR) is a potentially disruptive technology that enriches the consumer experience and transforms marketing. With the surging popularity of AR in marketing practice, academic efforts to investigate its effects on consumer experience, response, and behavior have increased significantly. To obtain an integrated and comprehensive view of the front-line in AR marketing research and identify the gaps for future research, we analyze the existing AR marketing literature through a systematic literature review. Using 99 journal articles selected from the Web of Science core collections, this research sheds light on the general characteristics such as publication year, publication outlet, research design, and research method. Moreover, this research also gains insight into the AR marketing relevant factors such as application area, application context, AR type, and theoretical lenses. The findings of the analyses reveal the state-of-the-art of scholarly publications on AR marketing research. First, the number of journal articles on AR marketing increased rapidly in the past few years, and the journals that published articles on AR marketing cover a wide range of disciplines. Second, the empirical studies in most literature adopted the quantitative research design and used survey or experiment methods. Third, the studies in more than half of the journal articles used mobile AR applications in various online contexts. Fourth, the Technology Acceptance Model (TAM) and the Stimulus-Organism-Response (S-O-R) framework are the two most widely used theoretical lenses used in the literature. After that, the major application areas of AR in marketing are retail, tourism, and advertising. To identify the focal themes discussed in the three application areas, this research summarizes the studies by the outcome variables. Specifically, the outcome variables have five categories: technology-related, product-related, brand-related, tourist destination-related, and advertisement-related. Finally, this research proposes the agenda for future academic efforts in AR marketing.

**Keywords:** augmented reality, marketing, retailing, tourism, advertising, technology, brand, tourist destination

## 1. Introduction

Augmented reality (AR) is an emerging cutting-edge technology in marketing. It enhances the visual, auditory, tactile, and olfactory perception of users by augmenting or superimposing digital content such as text, geolocation information, graphics, audios, and videos onto a live view of the physical objects and environments in real-time [1–3]. AR establishes a closer relationship between users' physical space and virtual objects. Therefore, the user experience with AR is more immersive, more vivid, more interactive, and more realistic [4]. With the popularity of mobile devices and the availability of high-speed wireless networks, an increasing number of web-based AR applications and mobile AR apps have emerged to create novel, immersive, enjoyable, informative, and valuable user experiences. Accordingly, AR is becoming a disruptive technology that will transform marketing in the coming years [5]. An industry report released by PwC claimed that AR brought net economic benefits of $33 billion in 2019. Furthermore, the benefits will reach $338.1 billion by 2025 and $1.0924 trillion by 2030 [6].

The surging popularity of AR in marketing practice has attracted more and more academic efforts to investigate its effects on consumer experience, response, and behavior [7]. This growing interest in AR marketing calls for a synthesis of the existing literature to offer guidance for future research. However, as scholarly investigations on AR marketing are still in the infant stage, the extant literature on AR marketing is fragmented. In this regard, we analyze AR marketing literature through a systematic literature review to obtain an integrated and comprehensive view of the state-of-the-art of AR marketing research and identify the gaps for future research. Specifically, this research sheds light on the generic characteristics of the literature, such as publication year, publication outlet, research design, and research method. In addition, this research also gains insight into the factors specific to AR marketing, such as application area, application context, AR type, and theoretical lenses. We also identify the focal themes in each application area according to the outcome variables to illustrate the current status of scholarly investigation. Moreover, we propose the agenda for future research.

This systematic review differs from existing literature reviews in four ways. First, this review conducts an extensive examination of AR marketing literature. We initially identified 442 journal articles from 200 journals for manual evaluation. These journal articles cover a publication period from 2000 to 2021. After assessing the details following the guidelines of a systematic review methodology, we have 99 journal articles in the final set for analysis. Second, this study adopts a systematic review approach, thus allowing better synthesis and integration. It can help AR marketing researchers better understand existing findings and identify potential topics for future research. Third, this research gains insight into the factors specific to AR marketing, such as application areas, application context, AR type, and theoretical lenses, and summarizes the literature in terms of these factors. Finally, this research identifies and categorizes the AR marketing literature by its application areas, which offers a new perspective to gain insight into the state-of-the-art of AR marketing research.

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. First, we present the concept of AR and discuss its application in marketing. Second, we explain the methodology used in the literature search and select the journal articles reviewed in this study. Third, we summarize the journal articles for final analysis in terms of the general factors (e.g., publication year, publication journal, research design, and research method) and the AR relevant factors (e.g., application area, AR type, application context, and theoretical lenses). Fourth, we analyze the focal themes in the three application areas of retail, tourism, and advertising. Lastly, we present the contributions and concluding remarks, future research agenda, and limitations of this research.

## 2. Augmented Reality and Augmented Reality Marketing

### 2.1. Augmented Reality

Augmented reality originated from Morton Heilig's bold and innovative idea that cinema needed to draw viewers into the onscreen activities by effectively taking in all senses [1]. Although we can track the history of AR back to the 1950s, the way of AR from laboratories to the industry has taken more than half a century. The exposure of AR to a mass audience has not realized until the explosive popularity of Pokémon GO in 2016, which provided both the social and fashionable acceptance for the success of AR in the market [8].

Augmented reality is built on computer vision and object recognition technologies. It enhances consumer experiences by augmenting or superimposing digital content (e.g., text, geolocation information, graphics, audio, and videos) onto a live view of the physical objects and environments (e.g., consumers' faces, bodies, and surroundings) in real-time [3]. The discussions of AR and Virtual Reality (VR) usually connect closely. Compared with traditional media, AR and VR aim to provide users with enriched, interactive, and immersive media experiences [9]. While VR creates a fully computer-generated virtual environment, AR enriches the real environment by integrating context-aware digital information [9,10].

A typical AR system consists of three components: a geospatial datum for the virtual object, a surface to project virtual elements, and an image processing unit [1]. Early AR systems have limited applications in business practices. They need to be built on dedicated devices such as smart glasses (e.g., HoloLens Magic and Google Glass) [11], somatosensory devices (e.g., Kinect) [12,13], or fixed devices (e.g., PC and its connected webcam) and smart mirror [14,15]. Recently, with the prevalence of personal mobile devices (e.g., smartphones and tablets) and the availability of high-speed wireless networks, the application of AR has proliferated in a variety of fields such as education [16], manufacturing [17], healthcare [18], and marketing [5].

### 2.2. Augmented Reality Marketing

Augmented reality marketing refers to the application of AR in marketing to enhance consumers' experiences, increase their satisfaction, shape their behavior, and boost companies' revenues [10,19–21]. The novel and attractive media of presentation and interaction enabled by AR play a crucial role in achieving the desired effects. Specifically, AR integrates digital information or objects into consumers' perceptions of the physical objects and environments, thus providing consumers with rich information about products or services and allowing them to experience products and services easily. Specifically, AR not only improves online experiences and engagement but creates novel and fantastic on-site experiences [19,22].

First, AR engages consumers in online settings by providing real-time direct product/service experiences in various aspects of marketing [23]. Specifically, it overcomes the limitations of online shopping by allowing prospects to try on products, such as makeup [24–26], eyewear [9,27,28], clothing [12,29,30], shoes [31,32], and furniture [33–35] virtually without having to interact physically with them. Major online retailing platforms, such as Amazon [36], JingDong [2], Alibaba [2], and eBay [37], as well as leading brands, such as Tiffany & Co. [38], L'Oréal [39], Sephora [24], Nike [31], Converse [38], Zara [22], IKEA [35,36], Mini [1], and Lego [40], have devoted lots of efforts to introduce various forms of AR. They strive to enhance consumers' vicarious experience of physical products in online settings and make it more immersive, interactive, informative, enjoyable, and satisfactory [9]. Furthermore, AR advertising has significant advantages over traditional advertising. AR empowered advertisements are more informative, novel, entertaining, and complex, which leads to positive consumer responses and helps advertising campaigns stand out [3,41,42].

Second, AR offers a novel and fantastic on-site experience [43]. The application of AR creates augmented stores [44], restaurants [45,46], museums [47–49], and art galleries [50,51]. Retail giants, such as Lowes [52] and Machine-A [53], engage consumers and offer interaction by incorporating AR-supported features into their mobile apps and serving consumers in innovative ways. Furthermore, both established and novel brands, such as Kate Spade, Charlotte Tilbury, Timberland, Lily, Philip, Lego, and Toys-R-Us, offer consumers a plethora of interactive experiences. The interactive experiences include learning more about products, creating unique and customizable products, and virtually trying on products by installing in-store AR displays or adding AR-empowered features to the brand's mobile apps [52]. AR-augmented stores can produce extra brand value, simplify consumers' decision-making process, stimulate brand engagement, and lead to stronger consumer purchase desire [44,54]. AR-empowered restaurant services affect consumers' perceptions of restaurant experiences [46] and promote the choice of high-value products [45]. Moreover, augmented reality applications, especially those built upon wearable devices, affect tourists' destination visit intention [55]. They can also help tourists feel more enjoyable [51], enhance their experiences with tourist destinations [56,57], and increase their willingness to pay more [47].

## 3. Methodology

This research adopts the systematic literature review approach to avoid the well-known limitations of literature selection in narrative reviews and expert reviews [58,59] and synthesize the existing research findings in a transparent and reproducible way [60]. Following the guidelines for the systematic review approach [61–63], we conducted a review of AR marketing to identify relevant themes for this field. The guidelines suggest five steps for producing a systematic review that is both reproducible and transparent [60]. The five steps include question formulation, study location, study selection and evaluation, analysis and synthesis, and results reporting and using [64].

### 3.1. Question Formulation

Question formulation is crucial for a well-conducted systematic review. To obtain a deeper understanding of the AR marketing literature, we conduct a pilot search in the first stage. Based on the findings of the pilot search, we establish the research scope, formulate research questions, and clarify the inclusion and exclusion criteria. The pilot search leads us to the central questions of this research: what are the roles of AR in marketing? and how does AR contribute to marketing? Specifically, we propose four research questions: (RQ1) How is AR marketing defined in the literature? (RQ2) What are the characteristics of the AR marketing literature? (RQ3) What are the major application areas investigated by the AR marketing literature? and (RQ4) What are the focal themes examined in each application area?

### 3.2. Study Location

We perform the first search with the term "augmented reality" in the Web of Science (WOS) core collections, which return 9,145 journal articles on the subject of AR. However, most papers come from WOS categories such as Computer Science, Engineering, Medical, Education, and other fields not related to marketing. Therefore, we perform a second search in the WOS core collections using the following query applied to the title, abstract, and keywords: ["augmented reality" AND (marketing OR consumer OR customer)]. As this research focuses on the most relevant studies of AR marketing, we keep the papers from the five WOS categories, such as Business, Management, Hospitality, Leisure, Sport, Tourism, Computer Science, Information Systems, and Computer Science, Interdisciplinary Applications [65]. Furthermore, we limit the publication year to "1990–2021," language to English, and document type to Article. From the query, we get 341 journal articles.

To ensure that no major AR marketing articles are ignored in the analysis, we use a "snowball" technique. Specifically, we review citations from the key studies in the 341 journal articles retrieved in the previous search and identify more keywords related to AR marketing. After that, we perform the third search using the following query applied to the title, abstract, and keywords: ["augmented reality" AND (marketing OR consumer OR retail* OR advertis* OR brand* OR touris*)]. There are multiple possible terms under the root word. Hence, some of the words in the query are followed by a wildcard. Meanwhile, we also limit the five WOS categories in the previous search, the publication year to "1990–2021," language to "English," and document type to "Article." From the query, we obtain 442 journal articles.

### 3.3. Study Selection and Evaluation

For the 442 journal articles, we conduct manual screening of the titles, keywords, abstracts, and text under the following three inclusion and exclusion criteria:

(1) The study should focus on AR. Thus, we not only exclude the journal articles that discuss VR, XR, AI, and emerging innovative techniques but their combinations with AR.
(2) We focus on AR applications in the marketing context. Therefore, we exclude the articles that discuss the technical details of AR and AR-empowered systems and the application of AR in the non-marketing context.
(3) We aim to shed light on the findings of empirical studies. Hence, we exclude the conceptual papers and review papers.

After removing 343 journal articles, there are 99 journal articles included in the final set for further content analysis. During the screening process, two authors first identify potentially relevant articles independently. Then, we discuss the conflicts to obtain the journal articles for final analysis so that the agreement (Cohen's Kappa coefficient) is larger than 0.85. **FIGURE 1** presents the process used to select the journal articles for final analysis.

### 3.4. Analysis and Synthesis

The authors manually develop a data extraction process to report the main characteristics of the journal articles, such as publication year, publication journal, application areas, application context, AR type, research design, research method, and theoretical lenses. Then, two authors independently code the selected journal articles in themes, which offer us a more comprehensive understanding.

## 4. Descriptive Analysis

In this section, we summarize the 99 journal articles on AR marketing by examining the general characteristics such as publication year, publication outlet, research design, and research method, as well as the AR relevant characteristics such as application area, application context, AR type, and theoretical lenses.

### 4.1. Publication Year

As presented in **FIGURE 2**, the number of journal articles published on AR marketing keeps increasing from 2014 to 2021. Specifically, the first article is published in 2014 [29]. Then, the number of journal articles increases rapidly from 2015 to 2018. After that, the number of articles goes up slowly from 2019 to 2020 and surges in 2021. In particular, the number of journal articles published in 2021 is more than two times the number of journal articles published in 2020. The fast growth of publications is consistent with the proliferation of AR applications in marketing practices. Specifically, the number of global mobile AR users reached 200 million in 2015. It will grow to 1.1 billion in 2022 and 1.7 billion in 2024 [66].

### 4.2. Publication Journal

The 99 articles are published in 43 journals of which 25 journals only have one article and nine journals just have two articles. **TABLE 1** presents the nine journals that have three articles or above. Among them, Journal of Retailing and Consumer Services has 22 articles, which ranks first in all journals. The number of journal articles published in this journal accounts for more than one-fifth of all publications. Journal of Business Research has nine articles, which ranks second in all journals. Computers in Human Behavior and Technological Forecasting and Social Change tie for the third place with four articles each.

**TABLE 1 | Publication journal.**

| Journal | # Articles |
|--------|-----------|
| Journal of Retailing and Consumer Services | 22 |
| Journal of Business Research | 9 |
| Computers in Human Behavior | 4 |
| Technological Forecasting and Social Change | 4 |
| Current Issues in Tourism | 4 |
| Journal of Hospitality and Tourism Technology | 4 |
| Internet Research | 3 |
| Tourism Management | 3 |
| International Journal of Advertising | 3 |

### 4.3. Research Design

**FIGURE 3** shows the research design used in the selected AR marketing literature. We first analyze the research design by the broad category, that is, quantitative, qualitative, and mixed research design. The quantitative research design incorporates quantitative methods such as surveys and experiments. The qualitative research design adopts qualitative methods such as interviews and focus groups. Finally, the mixed research design uses both quantitative and qualitative methods [67]. As presented in **FIGURE 3A**, the quantitative methodology dominated the field. Specifically, 85.86% of the journal articles adopt the quantitative research design, 11.11% of the journal articles use the qualitative research design. Only 3.03% of the corpus takes the mixed research design.

Second, a fine-grained examination of the research design by single-method vs. multi-method and single-study vs. multi-study demonstrates that a considerate proportion of the journal articles use the multi-method or multi-study research design. Specifically, the single-method research design or multi-method research design refers to whether there are one or multiple research methods, such as survey, experiment, interview, and focus group, in the research design. Moreover, the single-study research design or multi-study research design refers to whether there are one or multiple studies in the research design. It is noteworthy that a single study can only use one research method. However, a single-method research design may have one or multiple studies. Thus, from the perspectives of single-method vs. multi-method and single-study vs. multi-study, we have three types of research design: single-method single-study, single-method multi-study, and multi-method multi-study. As presented in **FIGURE 3B**, most journal articles (75.76%) use the single-method single-study research design. Only about a quarter of the journal articles (16.16% + 8.08% = 24.24%) adopt the single-method multi-study or multi-method multi-study research design. The proportion of the journal articles using the single-method multi-study or multi-method multi-study research design among the journal articles using the quantitative research design (17.65% + 4.71% = 22.35%) is slightly higher than that among the journal articles using the qualitative research design (9.09% + 9.09% = 18.18%).

### 4.4. Research Method

**TABLE 2** presents the number and the ratio of the journal articles that use different research methods in the selected AR marketing literature. The most popular research methods are the experiment and survey, which are adopted by 43.44 and 39.39% of the journal articles, respectively. The statistics are consistent with the fact that most research in this field is consumer/tourist-oriented. Specifically, the survey studies can be the online survey, the offline survey, and those performed by survey companies. The experiment studies can be the lab experiment, the online experiment, and the field experiment. Among the qualitative methods, the interview is more popular than the focus group. In multi-method studies, the combination of experiment and survey is the most commonly used. Furthermore, scholars often use the combinations of the interview and one of the other three methods.

**TABLE 2 | Research method.**

| Research design | Method | # Articles | Ratio |
|-----------------|--------|------------|-------|
| Single-method | Survey | 43 | 43.44% |
| Single-method | Experiment | 39 | 39.39% |
| Single-method | Interview | 8 | 8.08% |
| Single-method | Focus group | 1 | 1.01% |
| Multi-method | | 8 | 8.08% |

### 4.5. Application Area

We identify retailing, tourism, and advertising as the three major application areas of AR marketing. Specifically, AR marketing research originates from retail. The studies in the first journal article and most of the early journal articles are conducted in retail. Moreover, the number of journal articles that shed light on AR in retail has increased significantly over the last few years. Tourism is the second application area of AR marketing. However, the increase in the number of journal articles on AR in tourism keeps steady after the first years. Advertising is the latest application area of AR in marketing. The first journal article on AR in advertising is published in 2018. Nevertheless, the number of journal articles on this topic remained limited until 2021.

**FIGURE 4** presents the number and ratio of the journal articles for the three application areas. First, retail is the earliest application area that attracted the most attention. There are 65 journal articles (65.66%) that shed light on AR in retailing. Second, scholarly works on AR in tourism appears shortly after those on AR in retail. Tourism ranks second in terms of the number of journal articles among the three application areas. There are 26 journal articles (26.26%) that have gained insight into AR in tourism. Finally, advertising is the newest application area that has received the least attention. Specifically, only eight journal articles (8.08%) have examined AR in advertising.

### 4.6. Application Context

The application context of AR includes both online settings and on-site scenarios. In online settings, AR enriches consumers'/tourists' experience and improves their satisfaction with online retail, virtual tourism, and online advertising [23]. In on-site scenarios, AR increases the attractiveness of physical stores, restaurants, museums, and art galleries by offering novel and fantastic experience to consumers/tourists [43].

**FIGURE 5** presents the distribution of application context in the selected AR marketing literature. While most journal articles investigate the AR application in online settings, a quarter of the journal articles gain insight into AR applications in offline scenarios. First, the studies in 66 articles (66.67%) have focused on the AR application in online settings. The majority of existing studies on the AR application in retail and all prior studies on the AR application in advertising used online settings. Second, the studies in 25 journal articles (25.25%) concentrate on the application of AR in offline scenarios. A considerable proportion of the studies focus on the application of AR in tourism used offline scenarios.

### 4.7. Augmented Reality Type

The AR applications that consumers interact with are built upon stationary devices (e.g., AR mirrors and PC), mobile devices (e.g., smartphones and tablets), wearable devices (e.g., headsets and smart glasses), and somatosensory devices (e.g., Kinect) [68]. Accordingly, the application of AR in marketing has different types, such as web-based AR, mobile AR, somatosensory device-based AR, wearable AR, and on-site AR.

Early applications of AR in marketing are web-based. In particular, consumers experience the products such as sunglasses, watches, makeup, clothes, shoes, and furniture through web-based AR applications (e.g., virtual try-on) installed on their PCs [10,29,69]. Specifically, they also need to have webcams connected to their PCs. Later on, with the widespread use of mobile devices that have innovative sensors (e.g., smartphones and tablets) and the availability of economic and high-speed mobile internet, mobile AR apps have gained popularity rapidly due to their convenience and low cost. Nowadays, AR is predominantly available in more and more mobile apps [70]. Meanwhile, AR is also in more sophisticated forms. Specifically, consumers need to experience AR using smart glasses (e.g., HoloLens) [71,72] or somatosensory devices (e.g., Kinect and depth sensors) [12,73,74]. Furthermore, it is worth noting that AR is prevalent in both online settings and on-site scenarios [43].

**FIGURE 6** presents the distribution of AR types for the selected AR marketing literature. First, mobile AR is the dominant AR type. The studies in 57 journal articles (57.58%) use mobile AR as the research context. Second, the popularity of web-based AR follows mobile AR. The studies in 18 journal articles (18.18%) use web-based AR. Third, somatosensory device-based AR, wearable AR, and on-site AR are rare AR types. Only several journal articles use these AR types. Finally, no clear AR type is claimed in 11 journal articles. A closer look at the relationship between application areas and AR types shows that mobile AR and web-based AR are prevalent across the three application areas of retail, tourism, and advertising. Specifically, mobile AR is the dominant AR type. However, on-site AR only exists in retailing, wearable AR only exists in tourism, and somatosensory device-based AR has not appeared in advertising.

### 4.8. Theoretical Lenses

Extant AR marketing literature builds upon a wide range of theory lenses. **TABLE 3** summarizes the nine popular theoretical lenses used in at least three journal articles. Specifically, Technology Acceptance Model (TAM) is the most popular one. Altogether, 15 journal articles use TAM in the studies. Meanwhile, Stimulus-Organism-Response (S-O-R) Framework is also a widely used theoretical framework in AR marketing literature, which has appeared in seven journal articles. Furthermore, Self-referencing Theory, Use and Gratification Theory (UGT), Equity Theory, Flow Theory, Theory of Reasoned Action (TRA), and Unified Theory of Acceptance and the Use of Technology (UTAUT) are also well accepted theoretical perspectives.

**TABLE 3 | Theoretical lenses.**

| Theory | Description | References |
|--------|-------------|------------|
| Technology Acceptance Model (TAM) | The theory suggests that individuals' perception of ease of use and usefulness determines their attitude toward a technological system and behavioral intention of using it | [13,23,27,33,55–57,75–84] |
| Stimulus-Organism-Response (S-O-R) Framework | The framework suggests that the various aspects of the environment (i.e., stimulus) evoke consumers' cognitive and affective states (i.e., organism), and subsequently affect their approach or avoidance behaviors (i.e., response) | [15,26,34,38,85–87] |
| Self-Referencing Theory | The theory suggests that self-referencing (i.e., the cognitive process of personally relating to information) heightens memories of advertisement information and enhances product and brand evaluations | [14,88–90] |
| Uses and Gratification Theory (UGT) | The theory suggests that media usefulness is the cognitive gratification that stimulates media usage intentions | [34,68,84,91] |
| Equity Theory | The theory suggests that individuals' decision-making of using a technology depends on their comparison of the input or benefits (i.e., what they receive) and the outputs or costs (i.e., what they sacrifice) | [11,20,24] |
| Flow Theory | The theory suggests that individuals can achieve the flow experience by implementing the design aspects that facilitate the optimal states of flow. Moreover, the flow experience will enhance other consumer experience outcomes | [12,22,43] |
| Theory of Reasoned Action (TRA) | The theory suggests that individuals' behavior can be predicted by their intentions. Moreover, the intentions are determined by their attitudes toward the behavior | [23,76,92] |
| Unified Theory of Acceptance and the Use of Technology (UTAUT) | The theory suggests that performance expectancy, effort expectancy, social influence, and facilitating conditions are direct determinants of behavioral intention | [78,93,94] |

## 5. Thematic Analysis

To have a fine-grained understanding of the AR marketing literature, we summarize the focal themes in the three application areas (e.g., retail, tourism, and advertising) based on the outcome variables. **TABLE 4** presents the outcome variables and their categories. To begin with, the literature on AR in retail examines technology-related, product-related, and brand-related outcome variables. Second, the literature on AR in tourism investigates the technology-related and tourist destination-related outcome variables. Finally, the outcome variables explored in the literature on AR in advertising include advertisement-related, brand-related, and product-related outcome variables.

**TABLE 4 | Outcome variables.**

| Application area | Category | Outcome variable |
|-----------------|----------|------------------|
| Retail | Technology-related | Consumers' attitude toward, satisfaction with, adoption/use intention of, continued use/reuse intention of, and recommendation intention of AR technology/AR retail application |
| Retail | Product-related | Consumers' product attitude, product purchase intention, willingness to pay a price premium, and WOM intention |
| Retail | Brand-related | Consumers' brand attitude, perceived brand personality, and brand purchase intention |
| Tourism | Technology-related | Tourists' attitude toward, adoption intention of, satisfaction with, and recommendation intention of AR technology/AR tourism application |
| Tourism | Tourist destination-related | Tourists' knowledge acquisition of, visit intention of, satisfaction with, and memory of tourist destinations; tourists' choice of products and willingness to pay a price premium in tourist destinations |
| Advertising | Advertisement-related | Consumers' attitude toward advertisements |
| Advertising | Brand-related | Consumers' brand attitude and brand liking |
| Advertising | Product-related | Consumers' product purchase intention |

### 5.1. Retail

Retail is the earliest application area of AR in marketing. Recently, the recognition and adoption of AR marketing by retail giants, leading on-site retailers, and well-known consumer brands have increased significantly. Both industrial practice and academic research have provided evidence for the potentials of AR to entertain, educate, and engage consumers. Specifically, AR can transform online and on-site experience, inspire brand love, facilitate pre-purchase product fit evaluation, boost product sales, and enhance post-purchase consumption experience [5]. Extant literature on the application of AR in retail has investigated the effects of AR use and various AR characteristics on a set of technology-related, product-related, and brand-related outcome variables and shed light on the underlying mechanisms of these effects. Some articles focus on a specific category of outcome variables (i.e., technology-related, product-related, or brand-related outcome variables); others examine more than one category of outcome variables.

**TABLE 5** presents the popular AR characteristics examined in the literature on AR in retail. The characteristics include interactivity, augmentation, informativeness, vividness, novelty, and aesthetics. Interactivity is the most widely investigated AR characteristic. It refers to the capability of a technological system to enable users to interact easily, control, manipulate, and be involved with the content. Augmentation, also called augmentation quality, is the most unique characteristic of AR that offers an immersive consumer experience. It describes the extent to which the digital objects are integrated into a person's real-world environment and the ability to enable users to move the digital objects naturally. Informativeness describes the degree to which the provided information is beneficial for better decision-making of consumers. Vividness refers to the ability of AR to combine the sensory experience of real objects (e.g., that can be seen and touched) with the non-sensory imaginary objects (i.e., those created in an individual's mind) to create a clear image of a product or experience for consumers. Novelty describes the newness, uniqueness, specificness, and unusualness of the AR-enriched information that are presented to consumers. Aesthetics describes the visual appeal of AR-enriched objects or AR-empowered environments.

**TABLE 5 | Augmented reality characteristics examined in the literature on AR in retail.**

| AR characteristic | Description | References |
|------------------|-------------|------------|
| Interactivity | It refers to the capability of an AR system to enable consumers to interact easily, control, manipulate, and be involved with the content. | [9,15,26–28,31,32,34,36,38,43,85,95] |
| Augmentation | It describes the extent to which the digital objects are integrated into the real-world environment and the ability to enable consumers to move the digital objects naturally | [2,19,33,34,39,40,85,86,91,96] |
| Informativeness | It refers to the degree to which the provided information is helpful for consumers' decision-making | [22,24,26,27,32,34,35,75] |
| Vividness | It describes the ability of AR to create a clear image of a product or experience for consumers by combining the sensory experience of real objects with the non-sensory imaginary objects | [9,36,38,43,85] |
| Novelty | It refers to the newness, uniqueness, specificness, and unusuality of the AR enriched information that consumers are presented with | [9,22,28,36,43,85] |
| Aesthetics | It describes the visual appeal of AR enriched objects or AR empowered environments | [10,22,27,29] |

#### 5.1.1. Technology-Related Outcome Variables

Technology-related outcome variables examined in the literature on AR in retail include consumers' attitude toward, satisfaction with, adoption/use intention of, continued use/reuse intention of, and recommendation intention of AR technology/AR retail application (e.g., web-based AR retail application and mobile AR retail app). Among these outcome variables, consumers' attitude toward and reuse intention of AR technology/AR retail application are the most popular. It is noteworthy that many journal articles examined two or more responses simultaneously. In particular, consumer attitude toward AR technology/AR retail application is frequently investigated together with their adoption/use intention of, recommend intention of, and reuse use intention of AR technology/AR retail application.

Consumers' attitude toward AR technology/AR retail application refers to their feelings associated with using it [9,27,28,32,75,76,80,86,95]. Consumers' satisfaction with AR technology/AR retail application describes their accumulative feelings when interacting with it repetitively within a period [20,97]. Consumers' adoption/use intention of AR technology/AR retail application refers to their willingness to adopt/use it [27,28,32,75,76,98,99]. Consumers' continued use/reuse intention of AR technology/AR retail application describes their willingness to use it again in the future [19,26,27,32,34,85,97]. Consumers' recommendation intention for AR technology/AR retail application refers to their willingness to share the information about it with friends privately or on social media publicly [19,27,76,80].

The literature on AR in retail has two primary streams. The first stream of literature sheds light on the effects of AR use and delves into the underlying mechanisms. The second stream of literature gains insight into the impacts of specific AR characteristics and reveal how these impacts take place. First, AR use, that is, the inclusion of AR-empowered product presentation and interaction capabilities in retail applications has positive effects on consumer responses to the AR technology/AR retail application (i.e., the web-based AR application and mobile AR app). Specifically, AR use can stimulate favorable consumer attitude toward [28,30,80,86], increase their satisfaction with [20], adoption/use intention of [28,99], reuse/continued use intention of [86], and recommendation intention [80] of the AR technology/AR retail application. These benefits are achieved through the utilitarian value and hedonic value [28,30,86,99] that consumers experienced while using the AR retail application.

Second, extant literature examines the impacts of specific AR characteristics such as interactivity, augmentation, informativeness, vividness, novelty, and aesthetics on consumers' attitudes toward [27,32,35,75,95], satisfaction with [97], adoption/use intention of [27,32,35,75], reuse/continued use intention of [19,26,27,32,34,85,97], and recommendation intention of [19,27,31,32,76] the AR technology/AR retail application.

Furthermore, compared with the studies focused on the effects of AR use, research on the impacts of AR characteristics delves deeper into the underlying mechanisms of how AR characteristics influence consumers' responses to the AR technology/AR retail application. Except for the evaluation of the utilitarian value and hedonic value [9,26,27,31,32,35,85], this stream of literature also proposes and validates a variety of psychological mechanisms, such as affective responses and cognitive responses [32], flow [19], inspiration [33,85], and mental image [76].

#### 5.1.2. Product-Related Outcome Variables

As shown in **TABLE 4**, product-related outcome variables investigated in the literature on AR in retail include consumers' product attitude, product purchase intention, willingness to pay a price premium, and WOM intention. The majority of the journal articles use consumers' product purchase intention as the outcome variable. Some articles also examined consumers' responses to the AR technology/AR retail application at the same time. Consumers' product attitude refers to their feelings about a product [2,100]. Consumers' product purchase intention describes their willingness to purchase the product they experience in the AR retail application [19,24,30]. Consumers' willingness to pay a price premium refers to their intention to pay a higher price for a product [85]. Consumers' WOM intention refers to their willingness to say positive things about the product to friends, relatives, and other people [31].

Similar to the studies on the impacts of AR on technology-related outcomes, literature on this theme also has two streams. The first stream of literature sheds light on the effects of AR use. The second stream of literature gains insight into the impacts of AR characteristics. First, AR experience/use stimulates the consumer purchase intention by increasing cognitive control [38], eliciting higher self-brand connection [14], and strengthening the utilitarian value and hedonic value perception [24,30]. Furthermore, the literature also reveals the boundary conditions of how AR experience/use impacts their purchase intention. For instance, Whang et al. [38] show that peer opinions moderate the impacts of AR experience on the consumer cognitive control and purchase intention.

Second, AR characteristics such as interactivity [9,31,32,85], vividness [9,31,85], augmentation [2,19,96], informativeness [32], novelty [31,85], quality [32,85], reality congruence [32], anthropomorphism [100], and sensory control modality [72] affect product-related outcomes. The majority of the studies focus on the consumer product purchase intention. Some studies also shed light on the impacts of AR characteristics on consumers' product attitudes [2,100], willingness to pay a price premium [85], and WOM intention [31]. These studies explain the impacts using consumers' experience of the utilitarian benefits and hedonic benefits [9,20,30,31,85], consumers' affective responses and cognitive responses [19,32], sense of presence [31], sense of immersion [9], mental imagery [72], inspiration [85], and flow [19].

#### 5.1.3. Brand-Related Outcome Variables

Compared with the AR marketing literature investigating technology-related and product-related outcome variables, the studies examining brand-related outcome variables are both new and limited in quantity. As presented in **TABLE 4**, the brand-related outcome variables include consumers' brand attitude, perceived brand personality, and brand purchase intention. Among them, consumers' brand attitude is the most popular one. Moreover, the brand-related outcome variables are usually investigated with the product-related outcome variables (e.g., product purchase intention) and technology-related outcomes (e.g., reuse intention).

Consumers' brand attitude refers to their feelings about a brand [24,33,80,100]. Consumers' perceived brand personality describes their systematic and enduring perception of a set of human traits that serve as the foundation of brand relational consequences and brand equity [101]. Consumers' brand purchase intention refers to their willingness to buy the products of a specific brand [80].

Similar to AR marketing literature on product-related and technology-related outcome variables, the journal articles that investigate the effects of AR on brand attitude can be categorized into two groups. First, AR use (i.e., online product presentation with AR) enhances consumers' brand attitude by eliciting their perception of spatial presence, personalization, and utilitarian and hedonic benefits [24,80]. However, AR use can also be harmful to consumers' brand attitudes because it may elicit the perception of intrusiveness [24].

Second, AR characteristics such as augmentation and anthropomorphism influence consumers' brand attitudes. In particular, augmentation drives changes in consumers' brand attitudes through inspiration [33]. Anthropomorphism (i.e., endowing AR with human characteristics) influences consumers' attitudes toward the brand by boosting confidence, increasing the perceived transaction convenience and innovativeness, and decreasing the perceptions of barriers to AR use [100]. Furthermore, AR types such as goal and location affect consumers' perceived brand personality. The impact is mediated by consumers' perceived AR app experience and attitudes toward the AR app and moderated by consumer characteristics such as IT innovativeness and shopping orientation [101].

### 5.2. Tourism

Tourism is an emerging application area of AR marketing. Different from retail in which increasing product sales is the central point, the primary concern for tourism is enhancing visitors' experience. AR is valuable for the tourism industry in multiple ways, such as economic, experiential, social, epistemic, cultural and historical, and educational [102]. The application of AR in tourism transforms tourists' experience by providing more interactive, enjoyable, personalized, and context-aware tourism experiences, which further increases tourists' satisfaction and expands target markets [57,102,103]. Therefore, more and more business entities in tourism, such as tourism destinations [92,104], heritage tourism sites [79,105], museums [47], art galleries [50,106], protected areas [57], science festivals [56], theme parks [103], and restaurants [45,46], adopt AR applications in offline environments and online settings.

The first journal article on AR in tourism was published in 2015, which is just one year after the publication of the first journal article on AR in retail. The number of journal articles exploring AR in tourism keeps increasing over the past few years. Prior studies on AR in tourism examined the influence of AR on various technology-related and tourist destination-related outcomes. Some journal articles also delved into the underlying psychological and behavioral mechanisms. Besides, several journal articles gained insight into the broader themes, such as the perceived value of AR for the tourism industry [102,107] and the AR business models in the tourism industry [107].

#### 5.2.1. Technology-Related Outcome Variables

The technology-related outcome variables examined in the literature on AR in tourism are similar to those investigated in the literature on AR in retail. As presented in **TABLE 4**, the outcome variables include tourists' attitude toward, adoption of, satisfaction with, and recommendation intention of the AR technology/AR tourism application. Tourists' attitude toward the AR technology/AR tourism application refers to their feelings about the AR technology/AR tourism application [16,79,93,108,109]. Tourists' adoption of the AR technology/AR tourism application describes their willingness to use the AR technology/AR tourism application [79]. Tourists' satisfaction with the AR technology/AR tourism application refers to their overall feelings while interacting with it constantly within a period [103]. Tourists' recommendation intention for the AR technology/AR tourism application describes their desire to publicly or privately share the information about it [103].

First, scholars have proposed improved models of the well-recognized models, such as the Technology Acceptance Model (TAM), Unified Theory of Acceptance and Usage of Technology (UTAUT2), and Task Technology Fit (TTF). These models can better explain the determinants of the adoption of AR in tourism by incorporating new antecedents or combining existing models [16,79,93,108]. Particularly, tourists' perceptions of usefulness and ease of use of AR technology have significant positive impacts on their attitude toward AR technology. Moreover, tourists' motivations to adopt AR, such as hedonic motivation, utilitarian motivation, and self-presentation motivation, have significant positive effects on their attitudes toward AR tourism applications [109]. In addition, tourists' attitudes toward [49,109] and subjective norms of [49] AR technology positively impact their intention to use it.

Second, the three quality dimensions of the AR tourism application (i.e., content quality, personalized service quality, and system quality) affect tourists' satisfaction with and recommendation intention of it. The effect of the quality dimensions on tourists' intention to recommend the AR tourism application is mediated by their satisfaction with it. Furthermore, this effect is more prominent for the tourists with high innovativeness than for those with low innovativeness [103].

#### 5.2.2. Tourist Destination-Related Outcome Variables

Tourist destination-related outcome variables include tourists' knowledge acquisition of, visit intention of, satisfaction with, memory of, and WOM generation for tourist destinations, as well as tourists' choice of products and willingness to pay a price premium in tourist destinations. Specifically, AR enriches tourists' sensory, affective, behavioral, social, and intellectual experiences [45]. The enriched experiences lead to tourists' better knowledge acquisition of tourist destinations, increased intention to visit tourism destinations, improved satisfaction with and memory of the tourist destination, choice of higher value products, and increased willingness to pay a price premium. In conclusion, the application of AR in tourism increases the overall well-being of tourists [46].

Tourists' knowledge acquisition of a tourist destination refers to their learning of new, interesting, or necessary things about it [51,92]. Tourists' intention to visit a tourist destination describes their desire to visit it [23,47,92]. Tourists' satisfaction with a tourist destination refers to how much they enjoy visiting it using the AR tourist application [56]. Tourists' memory of a tourist destination describes what stays in their minds after visiting it using AR tourist applications [56]. Tourists' choice of higher value products refers to their decision to buy products of higher prices [45]. Tourists' willingness to pay a price premium describes their desire to pay a higher price that exceeds the benchmark price [13].

The studies delving into the underlying mechanisms of the effects reveal that they are achieved by creating an immersive experience, stimulating tourist engagement, and increasing processing fluency [45,105]. Moreover, the effects are heterogeneous across tourists with different visual processing styles and sensation-seeking tendencies, and products with different contextuality [45]. More nuanced investigations into the impacts of specific AR characteristics provide a deeper understanding of how AR affects tourists. For instance, the two AR empowerment features, such as environmental embedding and simulated physical control, foster immersion and increase the willingness to pay more by generating a restorative experience [13]. Moreover, the three dimensions of technology embodiment (i.e., ownership, location, and agency) affect tourists' enjoyment and enhance their experience [51]. The three key features of humanizing experiences in the AR tourism application (i.e., anthropomorphism, self-representation, and intimacy) lead to a more prominent effect on the brand love of tourism destinations [104]. In addition, both the information types (i.e., dynamic verbal vs. visual cues) and the augmenting immersive scenes (i.e., high vs. low virtual presence) influence tourists' purchase intentions and willingness to pay more. Specifically, dynamic verbal cues lead to a higher level of willingness to pay more than dynamic visual cues. The effect is more prominent in high virtual presence environments [47].

### 5.3. Advertising

Advertising is the latest and fast-growing application area of AR marketing. The application of AR in advertising is mobile apps based [3,41] or in the form of online AR advertisement videos [42]. Compared with traditional print advertising, radio advertising, and TV broadcast advertising, AR advertising is more informative, novel, entertaining, and complex [41,42]. AR-enabled immersive, interactive, and personalized experience elicits positive consumer responses and helps advertising campaigns stand out [3].

A variety of advertisement characteristics affect the consumers' affective, cognitive, and behavioral response to AR advertisements. The characteristics of AR advertisements include AR advertisement type (e.g., quick response hypermedia and app response hypermedia) [110], AR interaction type (e.g., instrumental and hedonic) [105], and advertisement context (e.g., realistic and imaginative) [105]. In addition, product type (i.e., think and feel) [105] and consumer personality traits (i.e., extraversion, openness, agreeableness, conscientiousness, and neuroticism) [81,110] also have influence on the consumers' responses to AR advertisements. Specifically, AR advertisements enhance consumer physiological responses [111], boost their engagement [3], and facilitate social experience sharing among consumers [3]. These desirable effects further stimulate positive attitudes toward AR advertisements [41], increase the efficacy of advertising campaigns [42], strengthen consumer-brand connections [111], increase the brand liking [105], and stimulate product purchase intentions [3,111].

#### 5.3.1. Advertisement-Related Outcome Variables

Advertisement-related outcome variables examined in AR advertising literature is consumers' attitudes toward AR advertisements. It refers to consumers' feelings toward AR advertisements [41,42,110]. Overall, AR advertising has many advantages over traditional ones. Specifically, AR advertising leads to positive attitudes toward the advertisements. This effect is mediated by consumers' perceived enjoyment and informativeness [110]. The content characteristics of AR advertisements, such as informativeness, novelty, entertainment, and complexity, affect consumers' attitudes toward AR advertisements. Moreover, irritation, value, and believability of AR advertisements serially mediate the effects of the content characteristics of AR advertisements and consumers' attitudes toward them [42]. Compared with traditional advertisements without AR, advertisements with AR can increase consumers' curiosity about the advertisements, which in turn attract their visual attention toward the advertisements and bolster their attitudes toward the advertisements [41]. Besides, AR interaction type, advertisement context, and product type affect the perceived informativeness of AR ads. Telepresence mediates the effects [105].

#### 5.3.2. Brand-Related Outcome Variables

Brand-related outcome variables examined in the literature on AR in advertising include consumers' brand attitude and brand liking. Brand attitude and brand liking are consumers' feelings about a brand [89,105,110]. AR advertisements have a positive impact on consumers' attitudes toward the brand. Consumers' perception of the advertisements' entertainment value partially mediates the effect [110]. Moreover, self-brand congruity, self-referencing, and perceived humor significantly influence consumers' post-use brand attitude toward the advertised brand [89]. AR interaction type (i.e., instrumental vs. hedonic), advertisement context (i.e., realistic vs. imaginative), and product type (think vs. feel) impose significant impacts on brand liking. Telepresence plays the role of mediator in the relationship [105].

#### 5.3.3. Product-Related Outcome Variables

The product-related outcome variable examined in the literature on AR in advertising is consumers' product purchase intention or willingness to pay. Consumers' product purchase intention or willingness to pay refers to their desire to buy the advertised product [89,110,111]. Compared with traditional advertising, AR advertising improves consumers' attitudes toward advertisements, enhances their emotional responses (i.e., physiological arousal), and leads to higher product purchase intention or willingness to pay [110,111]. The positive effect of AR advertising on consumers' product purchase intention is partly mediated by their entertainment value perception of advertisements [110] or fully mediated by their emotional responses (i.e., physiological arousal) [111]. Furthermore, self-brand congruity, self-referencing, and perceived humor affect consumers' product purchase intention. Self-brand congruity interacted with the other two factors to influence brand attitude, while the three factors interacted in pairs to affect consumers' product purchase intention [89].

## 6. Contributions and Conclusion

This study makes two important contributions to research in AR marketing. First, we delve into the factors specific to AR marketing research. In addition to the shared aspects such as publication year, publication journal, research design, and research method, we shed light on the factors specific to AR marketing such as application area, application context, AR type, and theoretical lenses. Our analyses show that retail, tourism, and advertising are the major application areas of AR marketing research. Specifically, retail is the earliest and most popular application area, advertising is the newest and least investigated application area. Next, most prior studies investigated AR applications in online settings, but only a small portion of the literature examined AR applications in on-site scenarios. Third, mobile AR applications and web-based AR applications are the most prevalent AR type in the three application areas. On-site AR applications, wearable AR applications, and somatosensory device-based AR applications have received little scholarly attention in some of the application areas. Finally, TAM, S-O-R Framework, Self-Referencing Theory, UGT, Equity Theory, Flow Theory, TRA, and UTAUT are the most prevalent theoretical lenses in AR marketing research. These findings offer more comprehensive and integrated perspectives to understand the state-of-the-art of AR marketing research.

Second, we identify the focal themes in the three application areas to illustrate the current status of scholarly works. We obtain the focal themes by the outcome variables used in the empirical studies. The outcome variables describe the effects of AR use in general and specific AR characteristics on the AR technology/AR application, products, brands, tourist destinations, and advertisement campaigns. Our analyses show that technology-related variables, product-related variables, and brand-related variables are the shared outcome variables examined in the literature of more than one application area. Tourist destination-related and advertisement-related outcome variables are studied in the literature on a single application area. Specifically, technology-related outcome variables include consumers'/tourists' attitudes toward, satisfaction with, adoption/use intention of, continued use/reuse intention of, and recommendation intention of the AR technology/AR applications. Product-related variables include consumers' product attitudes, product purchase intention, willingness to pay a price premium, and WOM intention. Brand-related outcome variables include consumers' brand attitudes, perceived brand personality, brand liking, and brand purchase intention. Tourist destination-related variables include tourists' knowledge acquisition of, intention to visit, satisfaction with, the memory of, and WOM generation for tourist destinations. The advertisement-related outcome variable is consumers' attitudes toward advertisements. These findings provide a clear guideline to grasp the main streams of the AR marketing literature.

## 7. Future Research Agenda

A systematic literature review integrates research papers in a comprehensive, structured, and analytical way. Therefore, it can identify the gaps in extant literature [63] and highlight the understudied areas that need further attention [60]. We discuss the important but uncovered topics that flow directly from our literature analysis. Then, we put forward the topics that the authors value but have not been investigated in detail by the extant literature.

### 7.1. The Effects of Augmented Reality on More Outcome Variables and Mediating Variables

As the methods used in most literature are the survey and lab experiment, the outcome variables examined in the literature are self-reported ones collected through scales. With the proliferation of AR applications, the availability of more data collection methods and data analysis techniques will increase significantly. Thus, future research can investigate additional outcome variables and mediating variables obtained from the AR application systems in natural settings [5,27,35,74,77,80,112] or measured via consumer neuroscience methods [90,111]. For instance, except for the examination of the effects of AR on product purchase intention, WOM intention, recommendation intention, and personal data disclosure intention, future research can shed light on the effects of AR on actual purchase behavior, WOM behavior, recommendation behavior, personal data disclosure, post-purchase product satisfaction, customer retention, and product return rate [24,32,35]. In this vein, we can gain broader insight into more nuanced consumer response and behavior; and obtain a deeper understanding of the affective, cognitive, and social processes underlying the effects of AR on consumer response and behavior.

Furthermore, most existing AR research examined consumers' immediate experiences and behavioral intentions toward AR. Future research can explore the persistent impacts of AR adoption and design features on consumers' motivation, experiences, responses, and behavior in various contexts using longitudinal approaches [22,25,26,40,41,43,46,47,71,74,91]. Overall, a more comprehensive understanding of what AR brings to various fields of marketing will enable us to better incorporate this novel and potentially disruptive technology in the service frontline design and operation.

### 7.2. The Heterogenous Effects of AR

The effects of AR are heterogeneous across consumers with different characteristics, products/services in different categories, and scenarios in different contexts. Although existing literature examines the heterogeneous effects of AR across some general characteristics of consumers, products/services, and contexts, future studies can delve deeper into more nuanced effects of AR regarding consumers, products, services, and contexts with different AR relevant characteristics.

With the fast-growing application of AR in marketing, consumers using these applications, and products/services offered through these applications, future research can delve deeper into the heterogeneous effects of AR on consumers' responses and behavior across consumer characteristics such as gender [22,24,26,46,56,80,113], age groups (e.g., children, middle-aged people, and elder) [22,24,26,27,30,32,35,46,97,101,103], educational level [22,47], occupation [96], culture background [8,24,30,35,56,57,75,95,97,101,103,113,114], personality traits [51,105,110], cognitive style [2], processing style [72], innovativeness [10,26,28,86,89], expertise regarding the products/services (e.g., novice vs. experienced) [47,90], need for touch (e.g., high vs. low) [30,31,89], need for vision (e.g., high vs. low) [12], technology awareness and enthusiasm [41], familiarity with AR technology [76], and privacy sensitivity [80,86].

Future research can also examine the heterogeneous effects of AR on consumers' responses and behavior regarding different product or service characteristics such as product type (e.g., hedonic vs. functional) [111,113], product category [26,27,32,43,76,85,96,101], product size (small sized vs. large sized) [9], product novelty (highly specialized vs. newly developed products) [31], level of body involvement (e.g., high, moderate, and low) [26,28], and brand awareness [96].

Moreover, future research can investigate the effects of AR on consumers' responses and behavior under the contexts with different characteristics such as customer experience stages (e.g., pre-adoption vs. post-adoption, pre-purchase vs. post-purchase, pre-trip vs. post-trip) [105], noise levels in the ambient environment (e.g., high-noise vs. low-noise environment) [41], choice situations [32], and privacy of the environment (i.e., public vs. private) [19,71,77].

### 7.3. The Effects of Specific Augmented Reality Design Elements and Features

As both the industry practice and academic investigation of AR marketing are still in the infant stage, most existing studies focus on the effects of AR use or AR characteristics. In this regard, deeper investigations of the impacts of sophisticated AR design features in marketing applications on the outcome variables that describe consumers' experiences of and responses to the AR technology/AR application, products/services, brands, tourist destinations, and advertisements are needed [36].

Particularly, to provide enriched information and offer rapid responses to consumers, further research needs to focus on the AR design elements and features that can increase the realisticness, authenticity, vividness, novelty, interactivity, and efficiency [29,27,40,43,99]. For instance, current AR marketing studies build upon AR applications that augment consumers' visual and auditory perceptions of products and services. With the emergence of the AR technology that can enrich more sensory experiences such as tactile, gustatory, and olfactory, new AR applications using it can provide multi-sensory feedback [72]. Thus, scholars can seek to investigate the effects of AR applications incorporating multi-sensory augmentation and feedback capabilities [3,12,45,72].

In conclusion, academic research can help better understand how AR design elements and features will affect consumers' motivations, experiences, responses, and behavior regarding products/services, brands, and product/service providers. Also, product/service providers can figure out ways of improving AR applications and better satisfying the needs of consumers. Finally, the stakeholders can reach a win-win situation in which both consumers will derive high experiences value and product/service providers can achieve high-revenue profit [29].

### 7.4. The Dark Side of Augmented Reality Application in Marketing

Most extant AR marketing literature focuses on the bright side of AR use and the positive effects of AR characteristics. However, little studies discuss the dark side of AR application in marketing. To provide enriched personalized services (e.g., consumer movement detection and synchronized and accurate response provision), AR applications need to collect, process, store, and transmit a variety of consumer data such as the face, body, and personal space [24,74]. Thus, potential ethical issues regarding privacy, surveillance, and security risk need more investigations in the future [8,24,38,68,71,104,114]. For instance, consumers' privacy concerns may act as a boundary condition and strengthen/weaken the effects of AR use or AR characteristics on their motivations, experiences, response, and behaviors [114]. Moreover, an underwhelming AR experience will harm consumers' product/service perception and damage brand equity [33]. Another potential outcome of the application of AR is vicarious consumption. Specifically, instead of interacting with the physical elements of a brand, consumers may only build connections with the brand in a computer-mediated environment [33]. Therefore, future research needs to hold a more balanced and critical perspective to examine when AR applications will backfire and lead to undesired spill-over effects [33].

## 8. Limitations

Although this research has many meaningful contributions, we acknowledge that this research still has several limitations. These limitations provide opportunities for further investigation. To begin with, the journal articles included in this research are extracted and selected according to our criteria. Thus, we may miss some valuable materials. For instance, we use the WOS core collections as the data extraction source to ensure the high quality of the literature analyzed in this research. Future research can extract literature from more databases such as Scopus, Elsevier, Emerald, Wiley, and Google Scholar to incorporate information from conference proceedings, research reports, working papers, theses and dissertations, books, magazines, white papers, and industry reports. Including more sources and casting the net wider help to gain additional insights. Also, as AR marketing research is still in the infant stage, we use descriptive analysis.

## References

1. Carmigniani, J., Furht, B., Anisetti, M., Ceravolo, P., Damiani, E., and Ivkovic, M. (2011). Augmented reality technologies, systems and applications. *Multimedia Tools and Applications*, 51(1), 341–377.

2. Fan, X., Chai, Z., Deng, N., and Dong, X. (2020). Adoption of augmented reality in online retailing and consumers' product attitude: A cognitive perspective. *Journal of Retailing and Consumer Services*, 53, 101986.

3. Sung, E. C. (2021). The effects of augmented reality mobile app advertising: Viral marketing via shared social experience. *Journal of Business Research*, 122, 75–87.

4. Cipresso, P., Giglioli, I. A. C., Raya, M. A., and Riva, G. (2018). The past, present, and future of virtual and augmented reality research: A network and cluster analysis of the literature. *Frontiers in Psychology*, 9, 2086.

5. Tan, Y. C., Chandukala, S. R., and Reddy, S. K. (2022). Augmented reality in retail and its impact on sales. *Journal of Marketing*, 86(1), 48–66.

6. PwC (2019). Seeing is believing: How virtual reality and augmented reality are transforming business and the economy. Available at: https://www.pwc.com/gx/en/technology/publications/assets/how-virtual-reality-and-augmented-reality.pdf

7. Rauschnabel, P. A., Babin, B. J., tom Dieck, M. C., Krey, N., and Jung, T. (2022). What is augmented reality marketing? Its definition, complexity, and future. *Journal of Business Research*, 142, 1140–1150.

8. Rauschnabel, P. A., Rossmann, A., and tom Dieck, M. C. (2017). An adoption framework for mobile augmented reality games: The case of Pokémon Go. *Computers in Human Behavior*, 76, 276–286.

9. Yim, M. Y. C., Chu, S. C., and Sauer, P. L. (2017). Is augmented reality technology an effective tool for e-commerce? An interactivity and vividness perspective. *Journal of Interactive Marketing*, 39, 89–103.

10. Huang, T. L., and Liao, S. L. (2015). A model of acceptance of augmented-reality interactive technology: The moderating role of cognitive innovativeness. *Electronic Commerce Research*, 15(2), 269–295.

11. Poushneh, A. (2018). Augmented reality in retail: A trade-off between user's control of access to personal information and augmentation quality. *Journal of Retailing and Consumer Services*, 41, 169–176.

12. Huang, T. L., and Liao, S. L. (2017). Creating e-shopping multisensory flow experience through augmented-reality interactive technology. *Internet Research*, 27, 449–475.

13. Huang, T. L. (2021). Restorative experiences and online tourists' willingness to pay a price premium in an augmented reality environment. *Journal of Retailing and Consumer Services*, 58, 102256.

14. Baek, T. H., Yoo, C. Y., and Yoon, S. (2018). Augment yourself through virtual mirror: The impact of self-viewing and narcissism on consumer responses. *International Journal of Advertising*, 37, 421–439.

15. Rese, A., Baier, D., Geyer-Schulz, A., and Schreiber, S. (2017). How augmented reality apps are accepted by consumers: A comparative analysis using scales and opinions. *Technological Forecasting and Social Change*, 124, 306–319.

16. Wu, H. K., Lee, S. W. Y., Chang, H. Y., and Liang, J. C. (2013). Current status, opportunities and challenges of augmented reality in education. *Computers and Education*, 62, 41–49.

17. Nee, A. Y., Ong, S. K., Chryssolouris, G., and Mourtzis, D. (2012). Augmented reality applications in design and manufacturing. *CIRP Annals*, 61(2), 657–679.

18. Ferrari, V., Klinker, G., and Cutolo, F. (2019). Augmented reality in healthcare. *Journal of Healthcare Engineering*, 2019, 9321535.

19. Javornik, A. (2016). "It's an illusion, but it looks real!" Consumer affective, cognitive and behavioural responses to augmented reality applications. *Journal of Marketing Management*, 32, 987–1011.

20. Poushneh, A., and Vasquez-Parraga, A. Z. (2017). Discernible impact of augmented reality on retail customer's experience, satisfaction and willingness to buy. *Journal of Retailing and Consumer Services*, 34, 229–234.

21. Bell, D. R., Gallino, S., and Moreno, A. (2018). Offline showrooms in omnichannel retail: Demand and operational benefits. *Management Science*, 64, 1629–1651.

22. Yuan, C., Wang, S., Yu, X., Kim, K. H., and Moon, H. (2021). The influence of flow experience in the augmented reality context on psychological ownership. *International Journal of Advertising*, 40, 922–944.

23. Chung, N., Lee, H., Kim, J. Y., and Koo, C. (2018). The role of augmented reality for experience-influenced environments: The case of cultural heritage tourism in Korea. *Journal of Travel Research*, 57, 627–643.

24. Smink, A. R., Frowijn, S., van Reijmersdal, E. A., van Noort, G., and Neijens, P. C. (2019). Try online before you buy: How does shopping with augmented reality affect brand responses and personal data disclosure. *Electronic Commerce Research and Applications*, 35, 100854.

25. Javornik, A., Marder, B., Pizzetti, M., and Warlop, L. (2021). Augmented self-the effects of virtual face augmentation on consumers' self-concept. *Journal of Business Research*, 130, 170–187.

26. Hsu, S. H. Y., Tsou, H. T., and Chen, J. S. (2021). "Yes, we do. Why not use augmented reality?" customer responses to experiential presentations of AR-based applications. *Journal of Retailing and Consumer Services*, 62, 102649.

27. Pantano, E., Rese, A., and Baier, D. (2017). Enhancing the online decision-making process by using augmented reality: A two country comparison of youth markets. *Journal of Retailing and Consumer Services*, 38, 81–95.

28. Yim, M. Y. C., and Park, S. Y. (2019). "I am not satisfied with my body, so I like augmented reality (AR)": Consumer responses to AR-based product presentations. *Journal of Business Research*, 100, 581–589.

29. Huang, T. L., and Liu, F. H. (2014). Formation of augmented-reality interactive technology's persuasive effects from the perspective of experiential value. *Internet Research*, 24, 82–109.

30. Plotkina, D., and Saurel, H. (2019). Me or just like me? The role of virtual try-on and physical appearance in apparel M-retailing. *Journal of Retailing and Consumer Services*, 51, 362–377.

31. Hilken, T., de Ruyter, K., Chylinski, M., Mahr, D., and Keeling, D. I. (2017). Augmenting the eye of the beholder: Exploring the strategic potential of augmented reality to enhance online service experiences. *Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science*, 45, 884–905.

32. Kowalczuk, P., Siepmann, C., and Adler, J. (2021). Cognitive, affective, and behavioral consumer responses to augmented reality in e-commerce: A comparative study. *Journal of Business Research*, 124, 357–373.

33. Rauschnabel, P. A., Felix, R., and Hinsch, C. (2019). Augmented reality marketing: How mobile AR-apps can improve brands through inspiration. *Journal of Retailing and Consumer Services*, 49, 43–53.

34. Nikhashemi, S. R., Knight, H. H., Nusair, K., and Liat, C. B. (2021). Augmented reality in smart retailing: A (n)(A) symmetric approach to continuous intention to use retail brands' mobile AR apps. *Journal of Retailing and Consumer Services*, 60, 102464.

35. Qin, H., Peak, D. A., and Prybutok, V. (2021b). A virtual market in your pocket: How does mobile augmented reality (MAR) influence consumer decision making? *Journal of Retailing and Consumer Services*, 58, 102337.

36. McLean, G., and Wilson, A. (2019). Shopping in the digital world: Examining customer engagement through augmented reality mobile applications. *Computers in Human Behavior*, 101, 210–224.

37. Banerjee, S., and Longstreet, P. (2016). Mind in eBay, body in Macy's: Dual consciousness of virtuo-physical consumers and implications for marketers. *Journal of Research in Interactive Marketing*, 10, 288–304.

38. Whang, J. B., Song, J. H., Choi, B., and Lee, J. H. (2021). The effect of augmented reality on purchase intention of beauty products: The roles of consumers' control. *Journal of Business Research*, 133, 275–284.

39. Hilken, T., Heller, J., Chylinski, M., Keeling, D. I., Mahr, D., and de Ruyter, K. (2018). Making omnichannel an augmented reality: The current and future state of the art. *Journal of Research in Interactive Marketing*, 12, 509–523.

40. Hinsch, C., Felix, R., and Rauschnabel, P. A. (2020). Nostalgia beats the wow-effect: Inspiration, awe and meaningful associations in augmented reality marketing. *Journal of Retailing and Consumer Services*, 53, 101987.

41. Yang, S., Carlson, J. R., and Chen, S. (2020). How augmented reality affects advertising effectiveness: The mediating effects of curiosity and attention toward the ad. *Journal of Retailing and Consumer Services*, 54, 102020.

42. Feng, Y., and Xie, Q. (2018). Measuring the content characteristics of videos featuring augmented reality advertising campaigns. *Journal of Research in Interactive Marketing*, 12, 489–508.

43. Barhorst, J. B., McLean, G., Shah, E., and Mack, R. (2021). Blending the real world and the virtual world: Exploring the role of flow in augmented reality experiences. *Journal of Business Research*, 122, 423–436.

44. Bonetti, F., Pantano, E., Warnaby, G., and Quinn, L. (2019). Augmenting reality: Fusing consumers' experiences and interactions with immersive technologies in physical retail settings. *International Journal of Technology Marketing*, 13, 260–284.

45. Heller, J., Chylinski, M., de Ruyter, K., Mahr, D., and Keeling, D. I. (2019a). Let me imagine that for you: Transforming the retail frontline through augmenting customer mental imagery ability. *Journal of Retailing*, 95, 94–114.

46. Batat, W. (2021). How augmented reality (AR) is transforming the restaurant sector: Investigating the impact of "Le Petit Chef" on customers' dining experiences. *Technological Forecasting and Social Change*, 172, 121013.

47. He, Z., Wu, L., and Li, X. R. (2018). When art meets tech: The role of augmented reality in enhancing museum experiences and purchase intentions. *Tourism Management*, 68, 127–139.

48. tom Dieck, M. C., Jung, T., and Han, D. I. (2016). Mapping requirements for the wearable smart glasses augmented reality museum application. *Journal of Hospitality and Tourism Technology*, 7, 230–253.

49. Zhuang, X., Hou, X., Feng, Z., Lin, Z., and Li, J. (2021). Subjective norms, attitudes, and intentions of AR technology use in tourism experience: The moderating effect of millennials. *Leisure Studies*, 40, 392–406.

50. tom Dieck, M. C., Jung, T. H., and tom Dieck, D. (2018b). Enhancing art gallery visitors' learning experience using wearable augmented reality: Generic learning outcomes perspective. *Current Issues in Tourism*, 21, 2014–2034.

51. Tussyadiah, I. P., Jung, T. H., and tom Dieck, M. C. (2018). Embodiment of wearable augmented reality technology in tourism experiences. *Journal of Travel Research*, 57, 597–611.

52. Chalimov, A. (2021). Bringing augmented reality to your retail app. Available at: https://easternpeak.com/blog/bringing-augmented-reality-to-your-retail-app

53. Chitrakorn, K. (2021). An augmented reality shopping boutique is here. Available at: https://www.voguebusiness.com/consumers/augmented-reality-store-machine-a-institute-of-fashion-design

54. Cuomo, M. T., Tortora, D., Festa, G., Ceruti, F., and Metallo, G. (2020). Managing omni-customer brand experience via augmented reality: A qualitative investigation in the Italian fashion retailing system. *Qualitative Market Research*, 23, 427–445.

55. Chung, N., Han, H., and Joun, Y. (2015). Tourists' intention to visit a destination: The role of augmented reality (AR) application for a heritage site. *Computers in Human Behavior*, 50, 588–599.

56. tom Dieck, M. C., Jung, T. H., and Rauschnabel, P. A. (2018a). Determining visitor engagement through augmented reality at science festivals: An experience economy perspective. *Computers in Human Behavior*, 82, 44–53.

57. Jiang, S., Scott, N., and Tao, L. (2019). Antecedents of augmented reality experiences: Potential tourists to Shangri-La Potatso National Park, China. *Asia Pacific Journal of Tourism Research*, 24, 1034–1045.

58. Tranfield, D., Denyer, D., and Smart, P. (2003). Towards a methodology for developing evidence-informed management knowledge by means of systematic review. *British Journal of Management*, 14, 207–222.

59. Kitchenham, B., Brereton, O. P., Budgen, D., Turner, M., Bailey, J., and Linkman, S. (2009). Systematic literature reviews in software engineering—A systematic literature review. *Information and Software Technology*, 51, 7–15.

60. Snyder, H. (2019). Literature review as a research methodology: An overview and guidelines. *Journal of Business Research*, 104, 333–339.

61. Webster, J., and Watson, R. T. (2002). Analyzing the past to prepare for the future: Writing a literature review. *MIS Quarterly*, 26, 13–23.

62. Denyer, D., and Tranfield, D. (2009). Producing a systematic review. In D. A. Buchanan and A. Bryman (Eds.), *The Sage handbook of organizational research methods* (pp. 671–689). Sage Publications Ltd.

63. Paul, J., and Criado, A. R. (2020). The art of writing literature review: What do we know and what do we need to know? *International Business Review*, 29, 101717.

64. Denyer, D., and Tranfield, D. (2009). "Producing a systematic review," in The Sage Handbook of Organizational Research Methods, eds D. A. Buchanan and A. Bryman (Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications Ltd), 671–689.

65. Alves, H., Fernandes, C., and Raposo, M. (2016). Social media marketing: A literature review and implications. *Psychology and Marketing*, 33, 1029–1038.

66. Alsop, T. (2021). Global mobile augmented reality (AR) users 2019-2024. Available at: https://www.statista.com/statistics/1098630/global-mobile-augmented-reality-ar-users

67. Sreejesh, S., and Mohapatra, S. (2014). *Mixed Method Research Design: An Application in Consumer-Brand Relationships (CBR)*. Cham: Springer International Publishing.

68. Rauschnabel, P. A. (2018). Virtually enhancing the real world with holograms: An exploration of expected gratifications of using augmented reality smart glasses. *Psychology and Marketing*, 35, 557–572.

69. Huang, T. L., and Tseng, C. H. (2015). Using augmented reality to reinforce vivid memories and produce a digital interactive experience. *Journal of Electronic Commerce Research*, 16, 307–328.

70. eMarketer (2020). US virtual and augmented reality users 2020. Available at: https://www.emarketer.com/content/us-virtual-and-augmented-reality-users-2020

71. Carrozzi, A., Chylinski, M., Heller, J., Hilken, T., Keeling, D. I., and de Ruyter, K. (2019). What's mine is a hologram? How shared augmented reality augments psychological ownership. *Journal of Interactive Marketing*, 48, 71–88.

72. Heller, J., Chylinski, M., de Ruyter, K., Mahr, D., and Keeling, D. I. (2019b). Touching the untouchable: Exploring multi-sensory augmented reality in the context of online retailing. *Journal of Retailing*, 95, 219–234.

73. Huang, T. L. (2018). Creating a commercially compelling smart service encounter. *Service Business*, 12, 357–377.

74. Huang, T. L., Mathews, S., and Chou, C. Y. (2019). Enhancing online rapport experience via augmented reality. *Journal of Services Marketing*, 33, 851–865.

75. Park, M., and Yoo, J. (2020). Effects of perceived interactivity of augmented reality on consumer responses: A mental imagery perspective. *Journal of Retailing and Consumer Services*, 52, 101912.

76. Castillo, S. M. J., and Bigne, E. (2021). A model of adoption of AR-based self-service technologies: A two country comparison. *International Journal of Retail and Distribution Management*, 49, 875–898.

77. Poushneh, A. (2021). How close do we feel to virtual product to make a purchase decision? Impact of perceived proximity to virtual product and temporal purchase intention. *Journal of Retailing and Consumer Services*, 63, 102717.

78. Paulo, M. M., Rita, P., Oliveira, T., and Moro, S. (2018). Understanding mobile augmented reality adoption in a consumer context. *Journal of Hospitality and Tourism Technology*, 9, 142–157.

79. tom Dieck, M. C., and Jung, T. (2018). A theoretical model of mobile augmented reality acceptance in urban heritage tourism. *Current Issues in Tourism*, 21, 154–174.

80. Smink, A. R., Reijmersdal, E., Noort, G. V., and Neijens, P. C. (2020). Shopping in augmented reality: The effects of spatial presence, personalization and intrusiveness on app and brand responses. *Journal of Business Research*, 118, 474–485.

81. Srivastava, A., Dasgupta, S. A., Ray, A., Bala, P. K., and Chakraborty, S. (2021). Relationships between the "Big Five" personality types and consumer attitudes in Indian students toward augmented reality advertising. *Aslib Journal of Information Management*, 73, 967–991.

82. Manchanda, M., and Deb, M. (2021). On m-commerce adoption and augmented reality: A study on apparel buying using m-commerce in Indian context. *Journal of International Commerce*, 20, 84–112.

83. Saleem, M., Kamarudin, S., Shoaib, H. M., and Nasar, A. (2021). Retail consumers' behavioral intention to use augmented reality mobile apps in Pakistan. *Journal of International Commerce*, 1–24.

84. Zhang, T., Wang, W. Y. C., Cao, L., and Wang, Y. (2019). The role of virtual try-on technology in online purchase decision from consumers' aspect. *Internet Research*, 29, 529–551.

85. Han, X., Wang, F., Lv, S., and Han, W. (2021). Mechanism linking AR-based presentation mode and consumers' responses: A moderated serial mediation model. *Journal of Theoretical and Applied Electronic Commerce Research*, 16, 2694–2707.

86. Daassi, M., and Debbabi, S. (2021). Intention to reuse AR-based apps: The combined role of the sense of immersion, product presence and perceived realism. *Information and Management*, 58, 103453.

87. Baytar, F., Chung, T., and Shin, E. (2020). Evaluating garments in augmented reality when shopping online. *Journal of Fashion Marketing and Management*, 24, 667–683.

88. Huang, T. L. (2019). Psychological mechanisms of brand love and information technology identity in virtual retail environments. *Journal of Retailing and Consumer Services*, 47, 251–264.

89. Phua, J., and Kim, J. J. (2018). Starring in your own snapchat advertisement: Influence of self-brand congruity, self-referencing and perceived humor on brand attitude and purchase intention of advertised brands. *Telematics and Informatics*, 35, 1524–1533.

90. Jung, T. H., Bae, S., Moorhouse, N., and Kwon, O. (2021). The impact of user perceptions of AR on purchase intention of location-based AR navigation systems. *Journal of Retailing and Consumer Services*, 61, 102575.

91. Cranmer, E. E., tom Dieck, M. C., and Fountoulaki, P. (2020). Exploring the value of augmented reality for tourism. *Tourism Management Perspectives*, 35, 100672.

92. Lacka, E. (2020). Assessing the impact of full-fledged location-based augmented reality games on tourism destination visits. *Current Issues in Tourism*, 23, 345–357.

93. Saprikis, V., Avlogiaris, G., and Katarachia, A. (2021). Determinants of the intention to adopt mobile augmented reality apps in shopping malls among university students. *Journal of Theoretical and Applied Electronic Commerce Research*, 16, 491–512.

94. Wu, X., and Lai, I. K. W. (2021). The acceptance of augmented reality tour app for promoting film-induced tourism: The effect of celebrity involvement and personal innovativeness. *Journal of Hospitality and Tourism Technology*, 12, 454–470.

95. Qin, H., Osatuyi, B., and Xu, L. (2021a). How mobile augmented reality applications affect continuous use and purchase intentions: A cognition-affect-conation perspective. *Journal of Retailing and Consumer Services*, 63, 102680.

96. Song, H. K., Baek, E., and Choo, H. J. (2019). Try-on experience with augmented reality comforts your decision: Focusing on the roles of immersion and psychological ownership. *Information Technology and People*, 33, 1214–1234.

97. Chiu, C. L., Ho, H. C., Yu, T., Liu, Y., and Mo, Y. (2021). Exploring information technology success of augmented reality retail applications in retail food chain. *Journal of Retailing and Consumer Services*, 61, 102561.

98. Bonnin, G. (2020). The roles of perceived risk, attractiveness of the online store and familiarity with AR in the influence of AR on patronage intention. *Journal of Retailing and Consumer Services*, 52, 101938.

99. Jessen, A., Hilken, T., Chylinski, M., Mahr, D., Heller, J., Keeling, D. I., et al. (2020). The playground effect: How augmented reality drives creative customer engagement. *Journal of Business Research*, 116, 85–98.

100. van Esch, P., Arli, D., Gheshlaghi, M. H., Andonopoulos, V., von der Heidt, T., and Northey, G. (2019). Anthropomorphism and augmented reality in the retail environment. *Journal of Retailing and Consumer Services*, 49, 35–42.

101. Plotkina, D., Dinsmore, J., and Racat, M. (2021). Improving service brand personality with augmented reality marketing. *Journal of Services Marketing*, 1–19.

102. tom Dieck, M. C., and Jung, T. H. (2017). Value of augmented reality at cultural heritage sites: A stakeholder approach. *Journal of Destination Marketing and Management*, 6, 110–117.

103. Jung, T., Chung, N., and Leue, M. C. (2015). The determinants of recommendations to use augmented reality technologies: The case of a Korean theme park. *Tourism Management*, 49, 75–86.

104. Huang, T. L., and Liu, B. S. (2021). Augmented reality is human-like: How the humanizing experience inspires destination brand love. *Technological Forecasting and Social Change*, 170, 120853.

105. Tsai, W. H. S., Tian, S. C., Chuan, C. H., and Li, C. (2020). Inspection or play? A study of how augmented reality technology can be utilized in advertising. *Journal of Interactive Advertising*, 20, 244–257.

106. tom Dieck, M. C., Jung, T. H., and tom Dieck, D. (2018b). Enhancing art gallery visitors' learning experience using wearable augmented reality: Generic learning outcomes perspective. *Current Issues in Tourism*, 21, 2014–2034.

107. Cranmer, E. E., tom Dieck, M. C., and Fountoulaki, P. (2020). Exploring the value of augmented reality for tourism. *Tourism Management Perspectives*, 35, 100672.

108. Jung, T. H., Lee, H., Chung, N., and tom Dieck, M. C. (2018). Cross-cultural differences in adopting mobile augmented reality at cultural heritage tourism sites. *International Journal of Contemporary Hospitality Management*, 30, 1621–1645.

109. Shin, H. H., and Jeong, M. (2021). Travelers' motivations to adopt augmented reality (AR) applications in a tourism destination. *Journal of Hospitality and Tourism Technology*, 12, 454–470.

110. Uribe, R., Labra, R., and Manzur, E. (2021). Modeling and evaluating the effectiveness of AR advertising and the moderating role of personality traits. *International Journal of Advertising*, 1–22.

111. Pozharliev, R., De Angelis, M., and Rossi, D. (2021). The effect of augmented reality versus traditional advertising: A comparison between neurophysiological and self-reported measures. *Marketing Letters*, 33, 113–128.

112. Tan, Y. C., Chandukala, S. R., and Reddy, S. K. (2022). Augmented reality in retail and its impact on sales. *Journal of Marketing*, 86, 48–66.

113. Chen, J. V., Ruangsri, S., Ha, Q. A., and Widjaja, A. E. (2021). An experimental study of consumers' impulse buying behaviour in augmented reality mobile shopping apps. *Behaviour and Information Technology*, 1–22.

114. Lim, X. J., Cheah, J. H., Ng, S. I., Basha, N. K., and Soutar, G. (2021). The effects of anthropomorphism presence and the marketing mix have on retail app continuance use intention. *Technological Forecasting and Social Change*, 168, 120763.

