# Educational Robotics Studies in Italian Scientific Journals: A Systematic Review

In recent years, there has been increasing attention to applying educational robotics (ER) in learning settings and, consequently, it has concerned and involved the entire pedagogical field, giving rise to a large amount of experimentation and research. Educational robots are used within the school curriculum and in extra-curricular activities to improve student interest, engagement and academic achievement in various fields, such as STEM and digital literacy, and in many other ways, for example fostering specific cognitive and socio-relational skills. In Italy, as in many other countries, an increasing number of publications are featuring this subject. While there are also some reviews, none of them has been interested in reviewing studies published in Italian journals. The aim of this work is to provide a systematic review of the literature regarding studies investigating educational robotics and provide suggestions for further research and teaching practices. To do this we used the PRISMA statement process. In total, 28 studies published between 2011 and 2021 in 49 Italian journals were analyzed. The main findings from this review provide the current state of the art on research in ER. Furthermore, the paper discusses trends and the vision toward the future and opportunities for further research.

## Keywords

educational robotics, Italian journals, social robotics, systematic review, STEM

## Introduction

Since from Papert's work [1], educational robotics has received global attention from the world of education, which has increasingly invested in this area of practice and research. Interest, which continues to grow to this day, has intensified over the last 10 years, as can be seen from the many literature reviews published on the international scene. These works highlight the breadth of the phenomenon, showing the different aspects and the varied research focuses. Benitti's review [2], one of the most cited, pointed out the potential of robotics in schools, highlighting the pedagogical features of projects but also the shortage of more quantitative work. The lack of meta-analysis can also be noted on this side. Mubin et al. [3], in a review on the applicability of robotics in education, focused on the several practical aspects of using robots in education, addressing issues such as child-robot interaction and highlighting the added value of robots as stimulating and engaging teaching aids in the classroom.

Some authors have explored the use and teaching of robotics in the school context by highlighting the central role of the teacher who is required to act as a researcher to process new knowledge [4–6]. Although the potential of robotic technologies is widely recognized in the school context, some studies have investigated teachers' perceptions about the use of ER in preschools and elementary schools, and how these perceptions may affect the use of robots in educational practices [4,6].

The subjects examined by the researchers ranged from early childhood education [7] to K-12 [5,8–10], as well as young children [11,12]. Additionally, they examined the learning environments in which such projects have been implemented: from the non-formal and extracurricular associative environment to the formal and curricular environment of school, including primary education [5,10]. The richness, heterogeneity, and variety of work is explained by the fact that robots are intrinsically versatile tools. In fact, apparently, only hardware features define the affordance of the device. Many researches demonstrate that the multifaceted nature of robotics fosters the design of countless new multidisciplinary activities in which technical-practical and social arguments coexist [13].

Research shows that robotics has also proved to be an important opportunity in inclusive education, distinguishing itself as a medium capable of providing effective support, in terms of wellbeing, attitude and knowledge, to sociocultural disadvantage, special educational needs and qualify as a mediator and promoter of gender equality [14–16]. In this vein, the synthesis by Pivetti et al. [17] investigates studies on educational robotics to support children with neurodevelopmental disorders. Beyond the numerous studies that have classified multiple educational robots as particularly effective tools in the STEM disciplines [2,11], few of them have tried to evaluate the potential of robots with social-assistive attributes to foster understanding of scientific concepts [18]. In recent years, also in the field of social robotics, numerous studies have been conducted on the use of social robots to promote the development of specific skills in students, particularly for children with Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) [19–21], with the aim of promoting the development of social skills through verbal or non-verbal feedback. In educational settings, social robots are also used to fill the role of tutors or peers [22], supporting lessons and encouraging students to acquire new skills [23], for example learning a second language. Although the use of educational robotics is widespread in each country and a variety of reviews are already available on specific aspects of the topic (see **TABLE 1**), we believe it is valuable to analyze specificities existing within a specific cultural context.

This has driven us to undertake this systematic review of the research literature published in Italy over the past decade. This review has multiple purposes: to verify what types of experiences have been documented in Italian journals; to provide educational professionals and researchers with a reasoned summary of the work published to date, in order to understand the direction of research, what types of devices have been most widely tested in which educational settings, for what ages, and for the enhancement of which specific social, cognitive, motor skills; to provide researchers with directions that could facilitate the implementation of new robotics projects, with the intention of prompting new empirical research in order to enrich the scientific landscape. Specifically, our research aims to examine the state of research in educational robotics based on the following research questions:

Question 1: For what specific purposes are robots used in educational contexts, and how are these practices implemented (which teaching methods were used most)?

Question 2: What are the general benefits of educational robotics according to the articles reviewed?

## Methods

With the goal of capturing a clear picture of what has been published on the topic in the last 10 years in Italy, we have done a systematic literature review using Borrego et al. [24] four-step process: search, selection, coding, and synthesis. The first two steps correspond to the stages of the PRISMA statement process—search (identification), selection (screening, eligibility, included)—while the other two concern the analysis work (coding and synthesis).

### Search Method

Since there is no specific database containing all the papers published in Italian journals, to retrieve the best Italian literature on robotics in education, it was necessary to find and search within each journal. Therefore, the first step was to carefully select the journals to be screened. For this purpose, we used the list of Class A journals accredited by ANVUR, the Italian agency for the evaluation of academic research, selecting, in particular, those in the disciplinary area dealing with didactics, educational technology and educational research methodology (11/D2 sector). Forty-nine Italian journals were selected (see Appendix 1).

Articles were identified by working in two steps. First, using the Google search engine, a limited search was performed with the qualifier "site:journalname.it" (where "journalname.it" means the website of each journal identified). The search string used was the follow:

"(Robot OR Robots OR Robotics OR Robotica) AND (coding OR pensiero computazionale OR computational thinking OR Social OR Sociale OR Student OR studente OR alunno OR School OR Scuola OR Education OR Educational OR Educazione OR Educativa OR Inclusione OR inclusion OR Teaching OR Insegnamento OR Learning OR apprendimento OR didattica OR docente OR insegnante OR Formazione)."

Subsequently, in order to check the completeness of the results, a search of each journal's website was executed using the same keywords. The lack of a specialized database for collecting articles published by Italian journals makes the task of compiling a research synthesis even more complicated. The search was performed from the beginning of February 2022 to the end of May 2022. A total of 122 papers were identified through Google search and websites.

### Selection Strategy

In the second phase, according to the PRISMA statement, the retrieved papers were analyzed based on the inclusion and exclusion criteria (**TABLE 2**). Two of the authors of this study worked together on deciding to include or exclude a study. As already noted, a total of 122 papers were identified through Google search and websites (**FIGURE 1**), of which 3 were reviews of other texts. Of these, 57 studies were discarded because, after reading their abstracts, they did not meet some of the identified inclusion criteria. The remaining 62 papers were independently evaluated by two authors who then compared them with the identified criteria and, after discussion, excluded an additional 34 papers, one of which was excluded because it was in Spanish.

The diagram depicted in **FIGURE 1**, based on the PRISMA declaration (Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses) [25], shows the entire process after which 28 papers were included in this review and subsequently thoroughly viewed and analyzed by the authors of this work. The papers included are listed in the "Results" section (see **TABLE 3**) and highlighted with an asterisk in the references.

### Coding and Synthesis

In the third phase of the process, we collected relevant data and chose criteria to classify all studies. We arranged the 28 papers in a spreadsheet and listed them according to the following information and features: (1) research method applied (qualitative, quantitative, mixed methods); (2) data collection used (observation, interview or focus group, test or assessment, questionnaire, student product evaluation); (3) Goals (education in robotics, education with robotics, teacher training, media education); (4) setting (formal, non-formal); (5) target (children, teenagers, adults); (6) school level (pre-school, primary school, middle school, high school, university); (7) subject (arts or humanities, life skills, inclusion, second language, STEM); (8) robot type (built by student, compact, social); (9) number of participants; (10) duration of empirical research. We then defined other categories, inferring them from reading the articles included and, in part, retrieving and adapting categories from other systematic reviews [26,12]. These categories may indicate some of the dimensions presented and analyzed in the research articles. Sometimes the information was not made explicit by the authors. Due to the lack of clarity, some authors' statements were interpreted. Some papers may provide data categorized into more than one subcategory (in which case, the categorizations in the tables of this paper have an asterisk symbol to the right of the category name). In the last stage, synthesis, we summarized the main findings of the selected articles, answering the research questions.

## Results

The papers analyzed were published from 2011 to 2021. Studies published in 2022 were not taken into account due to the publication time of this work. To date, different studies on the topic are "pending publication," and they are not yet fully available; therefore, in this work, any papers from 2022 have not been evaluated. **FIGURE 2** shows the trend in publications within the time range analyzed. As the graph shows, there is a publication spike in 2019. This variation is due to the publication of a special issue of the journal Form@re on the topic of robotics.

Our search, which considered 49 Italian journals, led to identify 122 papers in 23 journals and, after the analysis and evaluation phases, to select 28 papers from 11 different journals (see **TABLE 3**). Remarkably, in 26 Italian journals, educational robotics issues it seems that are never considered.

In the **TABLE 4** we summarize main design features of 28 papers included.

**TABLE 5** reports the main features that characterize the selected research papers.

Based on the data summarized by the table above, we can state that:

*   the preferred type of research design was qualitative (54%);
*   the preferred type of data collection was observation (30%);
*   the average duration of the research analyzed was around 6 months;
*   75% of the research has focused on the goal of education with robotics;
*   75% of the research has preferred a formal setting;
*   most of research was conducted with students attending primary school;
*   the average sample was composed of 49 subjects.

The samples retrieved from the analyzed research broken down in **TABLE 6**.

According to the data shown in the table above, the sample size varies greatly, as summarized by the variation coefficient (1.2). This variation is partially due to the type of research, with the case studies on inclusion and disabilities having small samples. It is also interesting that two studies (7% of total analyzed studies) do not give any information about their samples. With respect to subjects, most of the research was aimed at fostering the development of STEM competencies, as **TABLE 7** illustrates.

To answer the second research question, aimed at identifying the general benefits of educational robotics, we attempted to isolate and summarize the main educational objectives of the works through a categorization of the dimensions analyzed (see **TABLE 8**). Such dimensions (problem-solving, motivation, inclusion, etc.) point out the authors' interest in some aspects related to specific expected benefits through the practice of educational robotics. However, as we shall see in the discussion, in several cases the data stop at mere statements of principle without adequately supporting them with empirical data or arguments.

As **TABLE 8** illustrates, most of the studies were conducted with the aim of fostering the development of computational thinking (16%), while only 4% of studies were conducted with the aim of evaluating the technology from a usability, effectiveness, acceptability, or sustainability point of view. Two researchers independently coded the papers in order to categorize them. The rules were developed through discussions between the authors of this paper. Interrater reliability (Cohen's Kappa) was strong (k = 0.89), and disagreements between raters were all resolved through discussion.

Aggregating the data from **TABLE 8** we can see that 45% of the analyzed papers focused on fostering the development of metacognition processes and 26% were related to inclusion and social topics. Only 7% of the studies were conducted to foster teachers' professional development.

As **TABLE 9** shows, most of the studies (28%) were conducted using a project-based approach as teaching method, while only 7% of the studies were conducted using a free-play-approach. Most of them were organized as group work.

**TABLE 10** shows that most of the studies (82%) used robotic hardware. Of the total studies included, 17 (61%) used an educational robot, within that number, 3 studies used built and compact robots, and for this reason they were calculated twice within the subcategory. Only 6 researches (21%) used a social robot, and 5 researches (18%) did not use any robotic devices.

## Discussion

Based on the research questions that guided our investigation, we must point out the limitations of this work and suggest new frontiers of research on educational robotics. Of the 28 papers accepted published between 2011 and 2021, 26 were published in the last 5 years and 12 in 2019 alone. These data allow us to surmise that, also in Italy (see **FIGURE 2**), there has been growing interest in robotics, confirmed by the scientific literature. This is in line with the references of several researchers [15,27,10] regarding the lack of research on robotics (before 2017), a trend that does not reflect the growth observed in recent years.

### Main Findings

Our work, the main aim of which was to retrieve and analyze articles published in Italian Class A journals on the subject of educational robotics over the last 10 years (2011–2021), sought to answer two main research questions that guided the investigation from the outset. Regarding the first question, namely "For what specific purposes are robots used in educational contexts, and how are these practices implemented (which teaching methods were used most)?", we can state that we are in line with what has been reported in the international literature (e.g., [2,13,10]), i.e., that the main reason for its adoption is related to the promotion of STEAM skills. A series of Italian works have stated the potential of robotics in educational competitions to promote the development of problem-solving skills and computational thinking [28–31], soft skills [32] and disciplinary topics [33,34]. Torre [34] introduces math reasoning in high school in an interdisciplinary way through examination of dilemmas in a literary tale. The proposed story involves different time trajectories for the various protagonists to be achieved through problem solving and robot programming. Educational robots are also used to promote the development of scientific thinking (investigating the ability to intuit the behavior of a robot) and the use of scientific method [5] using an inquiry-based approach [35,36]. A type of robot called "MoveCare," on the other hand, has been used to improve the autonomy of elderly people [37], confirming that the potential purposes of robotics are multiple and ever-expanding.

Social robots are also present in the literature investigated in the field of special education, either to help children with ASD in social interactions by observing behavior and using human-robot imitative modeling to support the development of basic social skills [38,39], or as in the case of Iromec and Zora [40], to support play in children with severe motor disabilities. Robots with social features have taken on the role of tutors in teaching a second language [41–43]. De Carolis et al. [41] explore how social robots (specifically NAO) can be used in teaching a second language to unaccompanied migrant children. The overall aim of this research is to support the cultural processes of inclusion. The work has given ample space to the cultural aspect of the gestures required to enable social inclusion. Gasparini [42] presents a preliminary study on the use of the social robot NAO for teaching L2 vocabulary through the selection of gestures that can accompany comprehension. However, the work does not yet provide direct evidence. Lehmann and Svarny [43] were interested in probing students' thoughts and opinions on the role of Pepper, a humanoid social robot, in providing learning support during university lectures. The authors also wondered which type of feedback from the robot was most productive.

Some work focused on technology evaluation and measured whether the robotic technologies designed and implemented were sustainable and/or accepted by teachers and students. Two examples are works on the alpha and beta testing phases of designed and 3D-printed artifacts: a built robot [44] to develop digital skills in high school and a social robot [39] to foster the development of social skills in children with ASD. A considerable number of studies analyzed the aspect of teacher and student perceptions of robotics resulting from the use and implementation of this practice at school. In general, this type of research has been conducted through the use of questionnaires or interviews. There are at least five papers [45–49] that, overall, show that teachers have a strong interest in robotics. Regarding students' perceptions of educational robotics, Negrini and Giang [50] investigated its pedagogical value in formal education. Following a semester of workshops with Thymio II, four dimensions were investigated through a questionnaire: creativity, collaboration, computer skills (computational thinking), and promotion of interest in STEM. The work of Rubinacci et al. [32] also aims to investigate the expectations and opinions of students and teachers with respect to the development of soft skills, teamwork, understanding and problem solving.

Overall, based on our findings, we can state that the research published in Italian journals is moving in different directions, but the environment in which the experience takes place, in most of the works, appears to be formal. This finding helps us answer the second part of the question, which aims to examine which teaching methods were used when the research involved students. The results show a variety of methodological approaches (see **TABLE 9**) in the implementation of these practices, aimed at making the role of the student active and the teacher a facilitator [5]. Often, the teaching method was not explained in the articles, so it was difficult for the authors to determine which method accompanied these experiences. When the child-robot interaction was free and there was no instructional approach, the authors interpreted it as free play. In many works, however, it seems possible to interpret an eclectic use of multiple methodologies. Many educational robotics activities for students are supported by collaborative architectures. In 10% of them, working in pairs was preferred [38,32,31], while in 13% the working in a group was open [28,49,43,42], even to different age groups, which may mean the coexistence of other methodologies such as peer tutoring. Indeed, it would seem that the collaborative approach can be put into practice in different ways and is sometimes supported by other methodologies and, in particular, exploratory architectures.

The second research question in this review seeks to define the general benefits of robotics in the educational environment and the evidence on which they are based. Arar et al. [42], in the social robotic area, have provided reliable results indicating that the use of a social robot in children's L2 learning increases the effectiveness of the educational process and significantly improves learning gains. De Carolis et al. [41], in a preliminary study, show the effectiveness of the proposed approach in learning gestures using a social robot as well. The interaction was found to be engaging and quite spontaneous. Pennazio [38] pilot study notes the robot's ability to promote the acquisition of social skills through imitation and interaction. The author reports an increase in different measures (e.g., eye contact and attention) and a smooth transition in communication aspects. The child moves from seeking contact (e.g., caresses, hugs) from the robot to contact with the teacher, and then with peers. Van Den Heuvel et al. [40] evaluated the usability and playfulness of the Zora and Iromec robots with children with severe disabilities and found a significant and promising contribution in supporting free play and achievement of predetermined goals in rehabilitation and special education. Regarding teachers' perceptions, Negrini's [48] results show an interest and propensity to use robots for soft skills development. The study highlights factors that teachers believe limit the implementation of robotics in the classroom (e.g., cost and instructional design time). However, they prefer to use robots as educational technology tools to be programmed rather than as social robots that function as tutors or assistants. Rubinacci et al. [32] also noted that teachers see robotics as a useful tool for promoting soft skills, although, it is unclear whether it is the laboratory as an experience rather than the use of robots that develops these skills. The research also reports that students rated the lab positively in terms of promoting technical skills. In terms of enhancing soft skills, it emerges that students have high expectations for teamwork, understanding and problem solving. Importantly, for students in the post-test, the perceived effectiveness of robotics in supporting teamwork skills decreases. Negrini and Giang [50] showed that students were generally interested in working with the robot and believed that educational robotics enhanced twenty-first century skills. However, the greatest perceived improvements were found in the two dimensions of soft skills (i.e., collaboration and creativity) and not in the two dimensions of technical skills (i.e., computational thinking and computer science). The study on children's imagery by Bruni and Nisdeo [51] shows as overall results a strong prevalence of an anthropomorphic view of the robot. Scippo and Ardolino [31], through a longitudinal study and a mixed-method approach, observed an increase in creativity, sense of community, good self-efficacy, and low error pervasiveness after a course with the robot Ozobot. Cortiana and Rigotto [33], on the other hand, noted the usefulness of ER in encouraging readers' identification with characters proposed by literary texts. In an experiment conducted in a primary school, through pre-post administration of an adaptation of a validated questionnaire, they showed that robotics supports the development of affective-emotional dimensions by making the student more engaged and motivated. Significant change was shown in the area related to pleasure associated with reading. Two works [35,36] were interested in understanding the development of students' scientific thinking through the use of robots. The authors, analyzing student transcripts, found a category-structured taxonomy for assessing children's modes of explanation, useful for teachers to make an analysis of the cognitive skills employed during robotics activities. Castro et al. [52] have also experimented with educational robotics in school settings. Various tests were administered before and after the workshops, which showed improvement in executive functions (e.g., inhibition). Luccio [29] focused on performance, showing that the hands-on robot programming project significantly improved exam performance. From the test results on student performance, it was argued that, in general, educational robotics supported by an instructional methodology, such as the project-based approach, can support the learning process by making it more interesting, increasing collaboration skills and also the very knowledge of theoretical concepts.

### Limitations

This study has several limitations. Primarily, although a thorough search strategy was used, some empirical studies on the use of ER may not have been found for several reasons: the lack of a single, reliable search engine capable of indexing all Italian journals; the fact that not all publishers publish articles online in digital format (or that they must be paid for); the fact that some journals have changed publishers over time, leaving the repositories partially incomplete. The search for studies also did not cover either chapter in volumes of texts on robotics or conference proceedings. Secondly, several of the included studies showed, on one hand, a lack of information and data clarifying the implemented research design and, on the other, methodological weaknesses. In fact, very few studies presented a strict experimental-type structure. The methodological nature, therefore, included the possibility of being able to trace the evidence on the effectiveness of the experiments presented. Thirdly, many of the included studies took place in poorly controlled settings or with small sample sizes, which does not allow for generalization of the reported results.

## Conclusion and Future Directions

This study presents a review of the literature recently published in Italian Class A journals on educational robotics. The review conducted suggests, as Benitti [2] reported 10 years ago, the limited number of experimental and quantitative studies regarding learning through the use of robotics in education, which would seem to be a general trend in educational research in Italy. Regarding the work on teachers and students' perceptions, questionnaires implemented by the authors and not validated were used (in some cases, only Cronbach's alpha was calculated). This criticality also involves international work, which could be explained by the skills and timing required for statistical validation of an instrument. Interestingly, around 21% of the articles included in this work were written by international academics. This implies a general openness of the journals to research conducted outside national borders and the consequences of the Italian academic community being fully integrated into the international scientific debate. We can also conclude the need to conduct more longitudinal and long-term studies to investigate the impact of ER over time. In fact, only three articles reported experiences longer than 1 year. Two had adults, school teachers and computer science undergraduates as targets [46,29], and only one investigated a primary school class during the entire 5-year cycle [31]. Most of the studies were conducted in a formal environment, which is in line with other systematic reviews (e.g., [10]), indicating a propensity to include robotics practice at an institutional setting. It should be emphasized that, despite general encouragement by institutions and growing interest on the part of teachers, robotics at school has not been systematically integrated into curricula [53,3,5]. ER practice is often characterized as an optional or extracurricular activity. As pointed out by Tzagkaraki et al. [5], the analysis of the selected articles in this study does not reveal a link between ER and STEAM (which also sees an interconnection with Art) and there is not enough information on the role of teachers in the implementation of the practice itself. From this systematic research, one can see, in line with Kyriazopoulos et al. [10] but in contrast to Benitti [2], a decline in the use of LEGO robots in favor of new devices, which are cheaper, in step with technological advances and driven by open-source and maker logic. There is, however, an increase in studies using social robots, although these are very expensive devices. Finally, despite the positive effect of ER attested by the authors on cognitive, social-affective and learning dimension outcomes, there are several cases where the results are not clearly defined and no data were found to support them, thus creating the need for further investigation. Among future prospects, it is interesting to see whether the project proposals included in the review will be realized in quantitative works. Such types of research could enrich the international landscape of empirical research on robotics in education and could be included in a meta-analysis.

## References

1. Papert, S. (1980). *Mindstorms: Children, Computers, and Powerful Ideas*. Basic Books.
2. Benitti, F. B. V. (2012). Exploring the educational potential of robotics in schools: A systematic review. *Computers & Education*, 58(3), 978–988.
3. Mubin, O., Stevens, C. J., Shahid, S., Al Mahmud, A., & Dong, J. J. (2013). A review of the applicability of robots in education. *Journal of Technology in Education and Learning*, 1, 1–7.
4. Papadakis, S., Vaiopoulou, J., Sifaki, E., Stamovlasis, D., & Kalogiannakis, M. (2021). Attitudes towards the use of educational robotics: Exploring pre-service and in-service early childhood teacher profiles. *Education Sciences*, 11(5), 204.
5. Tzagkaraki, E., Papadakis, S., & Kalogiannakis, M. (2021). Exploring the use of educational robotics in primary school and its possible place in the curricula. In M. Malvezzi (Ed.), *Educational Robotics International Conference EDUROBOTICS 2021* (Vol. 982, pp. 216–229). Springer International Publishing.
6. Papadakis, S., & Kalogiannakis, M. (2022). Exploring preservice teachers’ attitudes about the usage of educational robotics in preschool education. In *Research Anthology on Computational Thinking, Programming, and Robotics in the Classroom* (pp. 807–823). IGI Global.
7. Frison, D. (2019). Educational robotics in the early childhood settings 0-6: A systematic review. *Form@re - Open Journal per la Formazione in Rete*, 19(1), 30–46.
8. Karim, M. E., Lemaignan, S., & Mondada, F. (2015). A review: Can robots reshape K-12 STEM education? In *Proceedings of the IEEE Workshop on Advanced Robotics and Its Social Impacts (ARSO)*.
9. Xia, L., & Zhong, B. (2018). A systematic review on teaching and learning robotics content knowledge in K-12. *Computers & Education*, 127, 267–282.
10. Kyriazopoulos, I., Koutromanos, G., Voudouri, A., & Galani, A. (2021). Educational robotics in primary education: A systematic literature review. In S. Papadakis & M. Kalogiannakis (Eds.), *Handbook of Research on Using Educational Robotics to Facilitate Student Learning* (pp. 377–401). IGI Global.
11. Toh, L. P. E., Causo, A., Tzuo, P. W., Chen, I. M., & Yeo, S. H. (2016). A review on the use of robots in education and young children. *Educational Technology & Society*, 19(2), 148–163.
12. Jung, S. E., & Won, E. S. (2018). Systematic review of research trends in robotics education for young children. *Sustainability*, 10(4), 905.
13. Anwar, S., Bascou, N. A., Menekse, M., & Kardgar, A. (2019). A systematic review of studies on educational robotics. *Journal of Pre-College Engineering Education Research*, 9(2), 19–42.
14. Daniela, L., & Lytras, M. D. (2019). Educational robotics for inclusive education. *Technology, Knowledge and Learning*, 24, 219–225.
15. Sullivan, A., & Bers, M. U. (2019). Investigating the use of robotics to increase girls' interest in engineering during early elementary school. *International Journal of Technology and Design Education*, 29, 1033–1051.
16. Bagattini, D., & Miotti, B. (2022). *Lavorare sul genere a scuola con coding e robotica educativa*. Carocci Editore.
17. Pivetti, M., Di Battista, S., Agatolio, F., Simaku, B., Moro, M., & Menegatti, E. (2020). Educational robotics for children with neurodevelopmental disorders: A systematic review. *Heliyon*, 6(10), e05160.
18. Papadopoulos, I., Lazzarino, R., Miah, S., Weaver, T., Thomas, B., & Koulouglioti, C. (2020). A systematic review of the literature regarding socially assistive robots in pre-tertiary education. *Computers & Education*, 155, 103924.
19. Ferrari, E., Robins, B., & Dautenhahn, K. (2009). Therapeutic and educational objectives in robot assisted play for children with autism. In *The 18th IEEE International Symposium on Robot and Human Interactive Communication* (pp. 108–114). IEEE.
20. Dunst, C. J., Trivette, C. M., Prior, J., Hamby, D. W., & Embler, D. (2013). Parents' judgments of the acceptability and importance of socially interactive robots for intervening with young children with disabilities. *Social Robots Research Reports*, 1, 1–5.
21. Conti, D., Di Nuovo, S., Buono, S., Trubia, G., & Di Nuovo, A. (2015). Use of robotics to stimulate imitation in children with Autism Spectrum Disorder: A pilot study in a clinical setting. In *Proceedings of the 24th IEEE International Symposium on Robot and Human Interactive Communication (RO-MAN)* (pp. 1–6). IEEE.
22. Belpaeme, T., Kennedy, J., Ramachandran, A., Scassellati, B., & Tanaka, F. (2018). Social robots for education: A review. *Science Robotics*, 3(21), eaat5954.
23. Leite, I., Martinho, C., & Paiva, A. (2013). Social robots for long-term interaction: A survey. *International Journal of Social Robotics*, 5, 291–308.
24. Borrego, M., Foster, M. J., & Froyd, J. E. (2015). What is the state of the art of systematic review in engineering education? *Journal of Engineering Education*, 104(3), 212–242.
25. Moher, D., Liberati, A., Tetzlaff, J., & Altman, D. G. (2009). Preferred reporting items for systematic reviews and meta-analyses: The PRISMA statement. *PLoS Medicine*, 6(7), e1000097.
26. Bacca, J., Baldiris, S., Fabregat, R., Graf, S., & Kinshuk. (2014). Augmented reality trends in education: A systematic review of research and applications. *Educational Technology & Society*, 17(4), 133–149.
27. Ching, Y. H., Yang, D., Wang, S., Baek, Y., Swanson, S., & Chittoori, B. (2019). Elementary school student development of STEM attitudes and perceived learning in a STEM integrated robotics curriculum. *TechTrends*, 63, 590–601.
28. Balestra, M. (2018). [Title not provided in original]. *Journal information not available in excerpt*.
29. Luccio, F. L. (2019). Learning distributed algorithms by programming robots. *Journal of E-Learning and Knowledge Society*, 15(2), 89–100.
30. Mortari, L., Silva, R., & Zanotti, A. (2020). Quando il Service Learning pone la ricerca educativa a servizio della formazione docente e dell'innovazione didattica: Il "caso" Resolving Robots. *RicercAzione*, 12(1), 83–105.
31. Scippo, S., & Ardolino, F. (2021). Computational thinking in Montessori primary school. *Ricerche di Pedagogia e Didattica*, 16(2), 59–76.
32. Rubinacci, F., Ponticorvo, M., Passariello, R., & Miglino, O. (2017). Robotics for soft skills training. *Research on Education and Media*, 9(2), 20–25.
33. Cortiana, P., & Rigotto, C. (2019). Teaching literature through educational robotics: An experience in the primary school. *Form@re - Open Journal per la Formazione in Rete*, 19(1), 91–105.
34. Torre, M. (2019). Seven Ozobot messengers: A story by Buzzati between mathematics and robotics. *Form@re - Open Journal per la Formazione in Rete*, 19(1), 392–400.
35. Datteri, E., Bozzi, G., & Zecca, L. (2015). Il "gioco dello scienziato" per l'apprendimento del metodo scientifico nella scuola primaria. *TD Tecnologie Didattiche*, 23(3), 172–175.
36. Datteri, E., & Zecca, L. (2017). Theoretical vocabularies and styles of explanation of robot behaviours in children. *Research on Education and Media*, 9(1), 3–9.
37. Zannini, L., Mazzolatti, D., Bernardelli, G., Antonacci, F., Borghese, N., & Daniele, K. (2019). Evaluating online games/activities by a group of elderly in a robotic experience aimed at supporting their independent living. *Form@re - Open Journal per la Formazione in Rete*, 19(1), 312–327.
38. Pennazio, V. (2017). Social robotics to help children with autism in their interactions through imitation. *Research on Education and Media*, 9(1), 10–16.
39. Campitiello, L., Di Tore, S., Lecce, A., Viola, I., & Sibilio, M. (2021). ASD-ROBOT: An approach that takes into account the sensoriality in the interaction between child, therapist and robot. *Italian Journal of Health Education, Sports and Inclusive Didactics*, 5(1), 8–16.
40. Van Den Heuvel, R., Lexis, M., & De Witte, L. (2016). Giochi di prossima generazione: I robot per supportare il gioco dei bambini con severe disabilità fisiche. *L'integrazione Scolastica e Sociale*, 15(2), 125–138.
41. De Carolis, B., Palestra, G., Della Penna, C., Cianciotta, M., & Cervelione, A. (2019). Social robots supporting the inclusion of unaccompanied migrant children: Teaching the meaning of culture-related gestures. *Journal of E-Learning and Knowledge Society*, 15(3), 43–57.
42. Arar, C., Belazoui, A., & Telli, A. (2021). Adoption of social robots as pedagogical aids for efficient learning of second language vocabulary to children. *Journal of E-Learning and Knowledge Society*, 17(3), 119–126.
43. Lehmann, H., & Svarny, P. (2021). Using a social robot for different types of feedback during university lectures. *Education Sciences & Society*, 12(2), 282–295.
44. Di Tore, S., Todino, M. D., & Sibilio, M. (2019). Disuffo: Design, prototyping and development of an open-source educational robot. *Form@re - Open Journal per la Formazione in Rete*, 19(1), 106–116.
45. Gramigna, A. (2018). RoboticaMente: metacognizione e innovazione nella scuola dei talenti. *Formazione & Insegnamento*, 16(2), 291–304.
46. Cicognini, M. E., Miotti, B., & Bizzarri, C. (2019). Educational robotics laboratories for active learning: The case study of Florence schools joining the Le Chiavi della Città project. *Form@re - Open Journal per la Formazione in Rete*, 19(1), 149–164.
47. Ferrari, L., Macauda, A., Soriani, A., & Russo, V. (2020). Educational robotics and artificial intelligence education: What priorities for schools? *Form@re - Open Journal per la Formazione in Rete*, 20(3), 68–85.
48. Negrini, L. (2020). Teachers' attitudes towards educational robotics in compulsory school. *TD Tecnologie Didattiche*, 28(2), 77–90.
49. Giannandrea, L., Gratani, F., & Renieri, A. (2020). Crossing boundaries: Documentation of a teacher training course on design, robotics and coding. *Research on Education and Media*, 12(1), 85–92.
50. Negrini, L., & Giang, C. (2019). How do pupils perceive educational robotics as a tool to improve their 21st century skills? *Journal of E-Learning and Knowledge Society*, 15(2), 77–87.
51. Bruni, F., & Nisdeo, M. (2017). Educational robots and children's imagery: A preliminary investigation in the first year of primary school. *Research on Education and Media*, 9(1), 37–44.
52. Castro, E., Di Lieto, M. C., Inguaggiato, E., Cecchi, F., Dario, P., & Cioni, G. (2019). Educational robotics and empowerment of executive cognitive processes: From typical development to special educational needs. *Form@re - Open Journal per la Formazione in Rete*, 19(1), 60–77.
53. Alimisis, D. (2013). Educational robotics: Open questions and new challenges. *Themes in Science and Technology Education*, 6(1), 63–71.

## Appendix

**TABLE A1** Class A Italian journals.

| Nr. | Journal Title | Website |
| :-- | :-- | :-- |
| 1 | Annali di storia dell'educazione e delle istituzioni scolastiche | https://www.morcelliana.net/204-annali-di-storia-dell-educazione |
| 2 | Annali online della didattica e della formazione docente | http://annali.unife.it/adfd |
| 3 | Bollettino Cirse | https://new.cirse.it |
| 4 | Cadmo | http://www.francoangeli.it/riviste/sommario.asp?idRivista=117 |
| 5 | CQIA Rivista—FORPERLAV | https://forperlav.unibg.it/index.php/fpl |
| 6 | Dirigenti scuola | https://riviste.gruppostudium.it/content/dirigenti-scuola |
| 7 | Educational reflective practices | https://www.francoangeli.it/riviste/sommario.aspx?IDRivista=172&lingua=EN |
| 8 | Education sciences & society | https://journals.francoangeli.it/index.php/ess/index |
| 9 | Educazione | http://www.giornaledipedagogiacritica.it/index.php/gdpc |
| 10 | Educazione linguistica, language education (ELLE) | https://edizionicafoscari.unive.it/it/edizioni4/riviste/elle/ |
| 11 | Encyclopaideia | https://encp.unibo.it/ |
| 12 | Excellence and innovation in teaching and learning | https://journals.francoangeli.it/index.php/exioa |
| 13 | Form@re | https://oaj.fupress.net/index.php/formare/index |
| 14 | Formazione & Insegnamento | https://ojs.pensamultimedia.it/index.php/sref |
| 15 | Giornale italiano dei disturbi del neurosviluppo | https://www.vanniniscientifica.it/it/prodotti/riviste/giornale-italiano-del-neurosviluppo-detail |
| 16 | Giornale italiano della ricerca educativa | http://ojs.pensamultimedia.it/index.php/sird |
| 17 | Giornale italiano di educazione alla salute, sport e didattica inclusiva | https://ojs.gsdjournal.it/index.php/gsdj |
| 18 | History of education & Children's literature | http://www.hecl.it |
| 19 | I problemi della pedagogia | http://www.problemidellapedagogia.it/index.php?option=com_content&view=category&layout=blog&id=10&Itemid=114 |
| 20 | Italian Journal of special education for inclusion | https://ojs.pensamultimedia.it/index.php/sipes/index |
| 21 | JE-LKS. Journal of e-learning and knowledge society | https://www.je-lks.org/ojs/index.php/Je-LKS_EN |
| 22 | Journal of educational, cultural and psychological studies—ECPS | http://www.ledonline.it/index.php/ECPS-Journal/ |
| 23 | La famiglia | https://riviste.gruppostudium.it/la-famiglia/archivio |
| 24 | L'integrazione scolastica e sociale | https://rivistedigitali.erickson.it/integrazione-scolastica-sociale/archivio/ |
| 25 | Lifelong, lifewide learning—LLL | http://www.edaforum.it/ojs/index.php/LLL |
| 26 | Maltrattamento e abuso all'infanzia | http://www.francoangeli.it/riviste/sommario.asp?IDRivista=76 |
| 27 | MEDIC. metodologia didattica e innovazione clinica | https://www.pacinimedicina.it/prodotto/medic-metodologia-didattica-innovazione-clinica-nuova-serie/ |
| 28 | Metis | http://www.metisjournal.it/index.php/metis/issue/archive |
| 29 | Nuova secondaria | http://nuovasecondaria.lascuola.it/ |
| 30 | Nuovo bollettino cirse | http://www.edizioniets.com/riviste.asp |
| 31 | Orientamenti pedagogici | http://www.erickson.it/Riviste/Pagine/Scheda-Rivista.aspx?ItemId=38474 |
| 32 | Paideutika | https://www.paideutika.it/rivista-3/ |
| 33 | Pedagogia e vita | https://riviste.gruppostudium.it/content/pedagogia-e-vita |
| 34 | Pedagogia oggi | http://www.siped.it/rivista-pedagogia-oggi/presentazione/ |
| 35 | Pedagogia più didattica | http://rivistedigitali.erickson.it/pedagogia-piu-didattica/ |
| 36 | QDS. Quaderni di didattica della scrittura | http://www.carocci.it/index.php?option=com_carocci&task=schedarivista&Itemid=262&id_rivista=42 |
| 37 | Qwerty | http://www.ckbg.org/qwerty/index.php/qwerty |
| 38 | Rassegna di pedagogia | http://www.libraweb.net/riviste.php?chiave=21&h=438&w=300 |
| 39 | REM | http://www.degruyter.com/view/j/rem |
| 40 | RicercAzione | http://www.iprase.tn.it/pubblicazioni/ricercazione/ |
| 41 | Ricerche di pedagogia e didattica | https://rpd.unibo.it/ |
| 42 | Ricerche di psicologia | http://www.francoangeli.it/riviste/sommario.asp?IDRivista=41 |
| 43 | Ricerche pedagogiche | https://www.edizionianicia.it/ricerche-pedagogiche/ |
| 44 | Rivista di storia dell'educazione | http://www.edizioniets.com/view-collana.asp?col=Rivista%20di%20storia%20dell%27educazione |
| 45 | Rivista italiana di educazione familiare | https://oaj.fupress.net/index.php/rief/index |
| 46 | Scuola democratica | https://www.mulino.it/riviste/issn/1129-731X |
| 47 | Studi sulla formazione | https://oajournals.fupress.net/index.php/sf |
| 48 | Studium educationis | http://ojs.pensamultimedia.it/index.php/studium |
| 49 | TD—tecnologie didattiche—Italian journal of educational technology | http://www.tdjournal.itd.cnr.it/ |