# Automatic Engagement Estimation in Smart Education/Learning Settings: A Systematic Review of Engagement Definitions, Datasets, and Methods

## Abstract

**Background:** Recognizing learners' engagement during learning processes is important for providing personalized pedagogical support and preventing dropouts. As learning processes shift from traditional offline classrooms to distance learning, methods for automatically identifying engagement levels should be developed.

**Objective:** This article aims to present a literature review of recent developments in automatic engagement estimation, including engagement definitions, datasets, and machine learning-based methods for automation estimation. The information, figures, and tables presented in this review aim at providing new researchers with insight on automatic engagement estimation to enhance smart learning with automatic engagement recognition methods.

**Methods:** A literature search was carried out using Scopus, Mendeley references, the IEEE Xplore digital library, and ScienceDirect following the four phases of the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA): identification, screening, eligibility, and inclusion. The selected studies included research articles published between 2010 and 2022 that focused on three research questions (RQs) related to the engagement definitions, datasets, and methods used in the literature. The article selection excluded books, magazines, news articles, and posters.

**Results:** Forty-seven articles were selected to address the RQs and discuss engagement definitions, datasets, and methods. First, we introduce a clear taxonomy that defines engagement according to different types and the components used to measure it. Guided by this taxonomy, we reviewed the engagement types defined in the selected articles, with emotional engagement (n = 40; 65.57%) measured by affective cues appearing most often (n = 38; 57.58%). Then, we reviewed engagement and engagement-related datasets in the literature, with most studies assessing engagement with external observations (n = 20; 43.48%) and self-reported measures (n = 9; 19.57%). Finally, we summarized machine learning (ML)-based methods, including deep learning, used in the literature.

**Conclusions:** This review examines engagement definitions, datasets and ML-based methods from forty-seven selected articles. A taxonomy and three tables are presented to address three RQs and provide researchers in this field with guidance on enhancing smart learning with automatic engagement recognition. However, several key challenges remain, including cognitive and personalized engagement and ML issues that may affect real-world implementations.

**Keywords:** Engagement estimation, Engagement definitions, Engagement datasets, Engagement methods

## Introduction

Recognizing learners' engagement can provide insight for enhancing learner-educator, learner-learning material, and learner-learner interactions [1]. Learner engagement has been found to be positively correlated with academic achievement [2], and higher engagement levels lead to better learning outcomes [3]. A good engagement state is associated with curiosity, interest, optimism, and passion, which enhances motivation to continue learning and pursue achievement [4]. Therefore, engagement is an essential component in the learning process that may reduce dropout rates, increase productivity and learning, and provide insights for improving course content and lecture plans [4,5].

Research on engagement can be considered from two perspectives [6]. Robot/computers/agents can be viewed as supports for increasing human engagement [7-10] or as tools for automatically estimating human engagement [11-17]. In this article, we mainly focus on the second perspective.

Moreover, engagement estimation methods can be divided into three categories: manual, semiautomatic, and automatic [18]. In traditional offline classrooms, educators can recognize engagement levels directly or use manual observation checklists and rating scales. In contrast, in distance learning settings, learner engagement is more difficult to estimate due to limitations with learner-educator interactions. Therefore, a smart learning setting that allows automatic engagement estimation is one of potential solutions for addressing this limitation.

Recent improvements in computational hardware and software that support classic machine learning and deep neural networks have led to promising research on automatic engagement estimation [19,20]. In particular, with the outbreak of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), work in this field has increased considerably [21]. Automatic engagement has become an important topic in several fields, such as human interaction research, including human-human interactions (HHIs) [22], human-robot interactions (HRIs) [7,23-25], human-computer interactions (HCIs) [26-28], and embodied conversational agents (ECAs) [29]. Furthermore, classroom applications are critical for improving smart education [30,31,1].

Several automatic engagement estimation methods have been proposed in recent years. Among them, computer vision-based techniques are the most popular because nonverbal behaviours (including head motion, eye gaze, and body pose) play key roles in determining engagement levels [32]. In addition, computer vision-based approaches offer unobtrusive assessments, similar to classroom situations where teachers observe learners without interrupting their activities. These methods are also cost-effective and usable in the near term [33]. Therefore, in this article, we conduct a systematic review on computer vision-based automatic engagement estimation methods that utilize appearance-based cues (such as videos or images).

Some physiological information-based methods that have received considerable attention in automatic engagement estimation research are also discussed. The development of cost-effective biosignal hardware, such as electroencephalogram (EEG), electrocardiogram (ECG), facial electromyogram (fEMG), and galvanic skin response (GSR), has provided simple and easy-to-use solutions [34]. Moreover, physiological signals support personalized analyses, which is pertinent for learners with special needs, such as those with autism [23].

In this review, we aim to provide new researchers and educators in smart education and distance learning settings with an overview of the primary requirements and methods used to develop automatic engagement estimation methods, particularly in education/learning settings. The definitions, datasets, and methods are summarized in benchmark tables to provide an accessible overview of the systematic frameworks.

The research questions that guided this review were defined as follows:

- RQ1: How should the type of engagement to be measured be defined?
- RQ2: What datasets are suitable for developing automatic engagement estimation methods?
- RQ3: What automatic engagement estimation methods have been developed in the literature?

We followed the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) to select articles for this review. In the literature, we first reviewed the definition of engagement to help new researchers understand what type of engagement they want to focus on. Understanding the type of engagement being focused on is important before engagement levels are measured to determine which engagement cues, datasets and methods should be used. The widely used datasets and machine learning-based methodologies for automatic engagement estimation are then examined.

The remainder of this article is organized as follows. The procedure for selecting the articles for this review is explained in "Review method" section. "Results and discussions" section presents the key finding based on the RQs. Finally, the conclusions, including the contributions, limitations, and future directions, are summarized in "Conclusion" section.

## Review Method

The systematic review methodology employed in this study was adopted from the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) model [35]. The review structure was guided from PRISMA 2020 Checklist addressing the abstract, introduction, methods, results, and discussion. However, for readability reason, we include the discussion in results section, which also is presented to address each RQ, and in conclusions section.

A literature search was carried out based on PRISMA flow diagram with modification by adding eligibility phase. Therefore, there are 4 phases in the flow, i.e., identification, screening, eligibility, and inclusion. We also modify the flowchart by adding initial inclusion criteria (such as keywords, timeline, and literature type), and focus discussion (i.e., engagement definition, dataset, and method). **Figure 1** shows the modified PRISMA flowchart used to select articles in this review.

**FIGURE 1**
Illustration of the article selection process adopted from PRISMA flow diagram

### Identification

The literature search was carried out by selecting research articles from the following electronic databases and libraries: Scopus, Mendeley, IEEE Xplore, and ScienceDirect. The following criteria were used to define the included studies:

- Focused on machine learning-based estimation
- Deployed in education/learning settings
- Journal publications or conference proceedings only if they developed an influential dataset for engagement estimation.

Based on the above criteria, we identified articles that satisfied the following terms: (1) keywords: automatic AND engagement OR student engagement OR learner engagement AND estimation OR prediction OR recognition; (2) publication year: 2010-2022; and (3) literature type: research article, excluding books, magazines, news articles, and posters. Additionally, to obtain more references, we used the snowballing approach by searching Google Scholar. A total of 429 articles were obtained in the identification phase according to the aforementioned search terms.

### Screening

In this phase, duplicate articles were excluded. Then, the titles and abstracts were scrutinized to determine whether they met the review criteria. The exclusion criteria included systematic reviews, surveys, and preliminary works (e.g., only report designs). With the exclusion criteria, 352 articles were excluded, yielding 124 articles.

### Eligibility

Journal articles and conference proceedings were assessed for eligibility in this phase. The titles, abstracts, main contents, and conclusions were examined to ensure that they met the inclusion criteria. In addition to the exclusion criteria mentioned in the screening phase, we also excluded articles that did not focus on automatic engagement estimation or were not related to education/learning settings. Even though face detection/recognition is a component of engagement estimation in some cases, we excluded articles that focused more on face detection/recognition than on engagement estimation.

A total of 10 journal articles were excluded in this phase according to the exclusion criteria. For the conference proceedings, only articles that proposed an influential dataset for engagement estimation were included. With this condition, 73 out of 76 articles were excluded.

### Inclusion

Finally, a total of 47 articles were selected, including 44 journal articles and 3 conference proceedings. In this review, we focused on three main topics: engagement definitions, datasets, and methods. In the discussion section, we also present some supporting articles with citations in the literature.

## Results and Discussions

Forty-seven articles were selected for this review. The articles were published between 2010 and 2022, although no included articles were published in 2013. However, research on automatic engagement estimation in education/learning settings has increased in recent years (**Figure 2**). In particular, in 2021, 14 articles (29.79%) on this topic were published (doubled from the previous year) following the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic, which started in 2020.

**FIGURE 2**
Number of reviewed articles per year

| Year of publications | Number of articles |
|:---------------------:|:------------------:|
| 2010 | 1 |
| 2011 | 1 |
| 2012 | 2 |
| 2014 | 2 |
| 2015 | 1 |
| 2016 | 1 |
| 2017 | 4 |
| 2018 | 3 |
| 2019 | 5 |
| 2020 | 7 |
| 2021 | 14 |
| 2022 | 6 |

Among the selected articles, 3 were published in conference proceedings, and the remainder were published in 33 different journals. Most of the journal articles were published in *IEEE Transactions on Affective Computing* (n = 9; 19.15%), *Computers & Education* (n = 3; 6.38%), and *Applied Intelligence* (n = 2; 4.26%), as shown in **Figure 3**.

**FIGURE 3**
Number of reviewed articles per journal

| Journal | 2010 | 2011 | 2012 | 2014 | 2015 | 2016 | 2017 | 2018 | 2019 | 2020 | 2021 | 2022 |
|:--------|:----:|:----:|:----:|:----:|:----:|:----:|:----:|:----:|:----:|:----:|:----:|:----:|
| ACM Transactions on Human-Robot Interaction | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 1 |
| Applied Intelligence | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 1 |
| Computational Intelligence and Neuroscience | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 1 |
| Computers & Electrical Engineering | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 1 |
| Computers & Education: Artificial Intelligence | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 1 |
| Education and Information Technologies | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 1 |
| EURASIP Journal on Image and Video Processing | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 1 |
| Expert Systems (Special Issues) | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 1 |
| Frontiers in Neuroscience and AI | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 1 |
| Future Generation Computer Systems | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 1 |
| IEEE Access | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 1 |
| IEEE Transactions on Affective Computing | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 1 |
| IEEE Transactions on Learning Technologies | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 1 |
| International Journal of Multimedia | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 1 |
| International Journal of Education and Artistic | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 1 |
| International Journal of Innovation Education and Research | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 1 |
| International Journal of Advanced Robotic Systems | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 1 |
| International Journal of Intelligent Engineering and Systems | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 1 |
| International Journal of Social Robotics | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 1 |
| Journal of Educational Computing Research | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 1 |
| Mathematics | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 1 |
| Procedia Computer Science | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 1 |
| Science Robotics | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 1 |
| Signal, Image and Video Processing | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 1 |

Interestingly, research on automatic engagement, which is aimed at education and learning settings, has been conducted in several research domains, including human-human interactions (HHIs), human-robot interactions (HRIs), human-computer interactions (HCIs), and embodied conversational agents (ECAs). From the reviewed articles, we also noted some studies based on data from offline classrooms. Therefore, we added the classroom as a separate research domain in this review.

As shown in **Figure 4**, research on automatic engagement estimation in education/learning settings was dominated by HCI (n = 28; 59.57%), followed by HRI (n = 10; 21.28%) and Classroom (n = 7; 14.89%) (see **Appendix Table 2**).

**FIGURE 4**
Number of reviewed articles per research domain

| Category | Value |
|:--------:|:-----:|
| HCI | 28 |
| HRI | 10 |
| ECA | 2 |
| HHI | 1 |
| Classroom | 7 |

### RQ1: How Should the Type of Engagement to be Measured Be Defined?

In engagement estimation studies, the definition of engagement varies considerably. The definition of engagement depends on the main focus of the study [36,37]. In educational or learning contexts, we found that the three main research domains depended on the engagement stimuli: HCI, HRI, and ECAs, HHI.

Although HRI research is novel in the field of education, robots can assist humans in different learning processes, such as helping children learn cognitive and social skills and supporting educators teaching difficult concepts [38]. Robots can not only assist in learning processes but can also measure and increase learner engagement [39,23,40]. HRI researchers defined engagement via two approaches. The first approach defines engagement as a process during interactions that combines verbal and nonverbal communication between two (or more) partners, and the second approach defines engagement as an interaction quality metric.

Moreover, researchers who focused on ECAs [41] and intelligent tutor systems (ITSs) [42] viewed engagement as a value that indicates how likely a person is to remain with their partner and continue an interaction.

Furthermore, engagement estimation research in the field of HCI defined engagement based on engagement cues in computer-based learning, such as learners watching videos, writing, and playing educational games, or in classroom recordings [11,28,1].

This inconsistent definition of engagement in the literature due to the lack of consensus and taxonomy for learning engagement [25] may cause confusion for new researchers in this field. To address this challenge, we introduce a taxonomy for engagement and systematically review the definition of engagement used in the selected articles (**Figure 5**). As a baseline, we follow the definition of engagement in education and learning environments proposed by Fredricks et al. [4], which has been widely used in engagement research [43-47].

Engagement is associated with internal states constructed by various cues and may not be visually apparent. Fredricks et al. [4] divided engagement into three categories: behavioural, emotional, and cognitive engagement. Although, in this definition of engagement, the components to construct each type of engagement overlap considerably, as shown in **Figure 5**.

Behavioural engagement describes learners' participation in learning and tasks [4]. In classroom settings, behavioural engagement is shown by actively participating in class, such as by asking questions or displaying attention and concentration [1]. Emotional engagement refers to learners' affective reactions in the classroom or during learning, including interest, boredom, happiness, sadness, and anxiety [4]. Cognitive engagement, which is also referred to as self-regulation, incorporates learners' psychological investment in learning, including their flexibility in problem solving, learning motivation, and coping mechanisms when faced with failure.

**FIGURE 5**
Taxonomy of engagement definition and its components

The components for assessing engagement include effort, attention, and persistence for behavioural engagement; various emotional reactions (such as anger, surprise, disgust, enjoyment, fear, and sadness [48]) to the learning materials for emotional engagement; and metacognitive strategies, namely, how learners set goals, plan, and organize their study efforts, for cognitive engagement [4].

In developing automatic engagement estimation methods, these components can be obtained with several modalities (Table 2), such as log files, which include information related to learner performance, reaction times, and errors [49-51]; affective cues, including face and body analyses from video/images [11,52,53]; and physiological cues, such as galvanic skin responses [54,55], electroencephalograms (EEGs) [56,57], heart rates [58,28], and combinations of these cues [33].

The engagement level can be determined by grouping emotions according to Ekman's basic emotions [48] or Russel's model [59]. For example, Altuwairqi et al. [60] suggested that 'surprised' indicates strong engagement; 'enthusiastic', 'excited', and 'nervous' indicate high engagement; 'satisfied' and 'happy' indicate medium engagement; and 'bored' indicates low engagement. Other behaviours, such as not looking at the computer and playing with hair, are classified as disengagement. For two-level classification, strong, high, and medium engagement are grouped into the high engagement class, while low and disengagement are grouped into the disengagement class. In addition, Olivetti et al. [61] divided engagement level into three classes based on the first and fourth quadrants of Russell's model: Class 1 included bored, relaxed, and unresponsive; Class 2 included happy, attentive, content, and perplexed; and Class 3 included surprised, astonished, and embarrassed.

Consulting the taxonomy, we then reviewed the definition of engagement with a two-step approach. First, we examined the modalities used in each article and how the engagement level was determined. The articles included three common engagement modalities: affective cues (including audio and visual), physiological cues, and log files that were annotated to determine engagement. Some works used publicly available datasets or facial expression tools that already included basic emotion labels. Therefore, we included basic emotions in the taxonomy at the same level as the other modalities to further define the type of engagement (i.e., behavioural, emotional, or cognitive). Note that one engagement cue does not exclusively correspond to one engagement type, as previously discussed.

For example, Apicella et al. [62] estimated emotional and cognitive engagement with a physiological sensor, i.e., EEG signal acquisition, because the type of stimuli considered during data collection was related to internal emotions and the cognitive task. In this case, two types of stimuli, namely, social feedback and background music, which were organized based on Russel's four quadrants, were used to estimate emotional engagement, while a cognitive task (Continuous Performance Test) was used to estimate cognitive engagement.

Moreover, Goldberg et al. [63] analysed three types of engagement with one modality, namely, videos recorded in an offline classroom. The behaviour of the students (on- or off-task) in the videos and a knowledge test presented during the lecture were used to estimate the behavioural and cognitive engagement levels, while facial features were extracted from the video to analyse emotional engagement. Therefore, in addition to the engagement cues used, defining what type of engagement is being measured depends on what stimuli were presented to the participant during data collection and what physical or cognitive behaviours were observed.

Overall, most of the selected articles analysed emotional engagement (n = 40; 65.57%) with affective cues (n = 38; 57.58%), including visual (from videos, which show facial, body, and head information) and audio (speech) cues (**Figures 6** and **7**) (See **Appendix Table 2**).

**FIGURE 6**
Pie chart of the engagement types estimated in the selected articles

| Category | Value | Percentage |
|:--------:|:-----:|:----------:|
| Emotional | 40 | 65.57% |
| Behavioral | 14 | 22.95% |
| Cognitive | 7 | 11.48% |

**FIGURE 7**
Pie chart of the engagement cues measured in the selected articles

| Category | Value (%) |
|:--------:|:---------:|
| Affective | 38 |
| Basic Emotion | 10 |
| Physiological Cues | 7 |
| Log Files | 11 |

### RQ2: What Datasets Are Suitable for Developing Automatic Engagement Estimation Methods?

Adequately labelled data and a sufficient amount of data that includes as many generalized variables as possible are important criteria for developing automatic engagement estimation methods. Automatic engagement estimation approaches can be developed by using publicly available datasets or self-collected datasets. Publicly available datasets are open, freely downloadable and may have some terms and conditions, such as use in only research contexts or with consent from the authors. Moreover, self-collected datasets (also referred to as non-public datasets) are built according to specific tasks and cannot be publicly shared due to privacy policies and ethics.

In contrast to emotion recognition datasets, which are typically labelled based on Ekman's basic expressions (e.g., anger, disgust, fear, happiness, sadness, surprise, and neutral), there are only a few publicly available engagement datasets, i.e., datasets that include 'engagement' in their labelling process. However, as shown in the taxonomy of engagement estimation (**Figure 5**), an emotion recognition dataset can be used for automatic engagement estimation by modifying labels or by introducing other measurement metrics to define engagement types. In this article, we refer to datasets that are used in the automatic engagement estimation literature even though they have no straightforward engagement labels as engagement-related datasets and datasets that have 'engagement' label as engagement datasets.

The selected articles include four engagement-related datasets and three engagement datasets that are publicly available. The public engagement-related datasets include: (1) the NVIE dataset [64], (2) BAUM-1 [65], (3) the MASR dataset, which is used in Psaltis et al. [66] but was proposed in [66], and (4) AffectNet [67]. The public engagement datasets include: (1) DAiSEE [68], (2) UE-HRI [69], and (3) MHHRI [39] (see **Appendix Table 3**).

DAiSEE is one of the most popular publicly available engagement datasets used in the literature [70-74]. Another popular publicly available engagement dataset is the Emotion Recognition in the Wild (EmotiW) dataset. This dataset was excluded from this review because the dataset is being continuously updated; however, EmotiW 2018 [75] and 2020 [76], are accessible for academic research [77].

The data in DAiSEE and EmotiW were collected in 'in-the-wild' environments, where participants contributed to the data collection process by recording themselves showing their upper body while watching learning videos. The participants could join from anywhere, and no camera or lighting specifications were considered. Therefore, the quality (e.g., illumination, background noise, and occlusion) of the videos varies. Although in-the-wild data have considerable variations, they are believed to be the closest to real-world conditions [68,75,76].

Despite the ease and amount of available data, DAiSEE, EmotiW, and other publicly available datasets were collected with participants of certain ethnicities, which may not be appropriate for all target subjects. Moreover, 'in-the-wild' data may be difficult to process due to the large variations. Therefore, most engagement studies build custom engagement datasets that address the requirements of their model or system (**Appendix Table 3**). However, because data collection is costly and time-consuming, the amount of data collected may be insufficient. In such cases, self-collected data can be combined with engagement-related datasets or transfer learning data to enhance the estimation performance.

Transfer learning is a type of fine-tuning, which is briefly described in Sect. "Fine-Tuning and Transfer Learning Techniques". In general, transfer learning involves using a pretrained neural network on a large dataset to extract features to use on tasks with smaller datasets. Some image datasets used for transfer learning include FER-2013 [78], VGGFace [79], VGGFace2 [80], FaceNet [81], AffectNet [67], 300W-LP and AFLW2000 [82], JAFFE [83], CK+ [84], and RAF-DB [85] (see **Appendix Table 3**).

#### Engagement Measurement

There are various approaches for measuring engagement, including self-reports, experience sampling techniques, teacher ratings, interviews, and observations [86]. In addition, different indices (such as performance indices, number of clicks, and sensor data) have been used to assess engagement [25,62,7]. However, external observations, self-reported measures and ratings are commonly used to measure engagement [11,36]. Moreover, most publicly available engagement datasets were collected based on external observations by external annotators (n=20; 43.48%) (**Figure 8**).

**FIGURE 8**
Pie chart of the engagement measurements and annotations used in the selected articles

| Category | Value |
|:--------:|:-----:|
| Public dataset | 5 |
| Self-report | 9 |
| External annotator | 20 |
| Index | 4 |
| Self-External | 6 |
| Self-Index | 2 |

Self-reported measures are cheaper and easier to collect than external observations, which require more personnel to measure engagement [36]. Self-reports can be performed by self-annotating or completing questionnaires related to self-engagement [87]. However, self-reported measures are prone to Dunning-Kruger effects, as people are biased in recognizing self-competence [88,89]. In addition, these measures dependent strongly on participant compliance and diligence [90]. The bias associated with self-reported measures was also observed by Ramanarayanan et al. [91,92].

Furthermore, observational measures limit the judgement quality of learners' actual effort, participation, or thinking [4,93]. An external observer is an overhearer [94] that may not consider nonverbal behaviours as signs of engagement. For example, learners who are judged to be on-task or engaged by observers may not actually be thinking about the learning material. In contrast, some learners who appear to be off-task or unengaged may be attempting to understand or relate new ideas to what they have learned [93]. In addition, in terms of cognitive engagement, cognition is not easily observable and must be inferred from behaviours or assessed according to performance or self-reported measures [4,95].

Alternatively, index measurements and combination approaches have been applied to reduce bias. Among the selected articles, four (8.70%) studies used index measurements, six (13.04%) studies combined self-reported measures with external observations, and two (4.35%) studies combined self-reported measures with some index.

Trindade et al. [96] performed calculations on log data from courses in Moodle to evaluate engagement. Similarly, Hasnine et al. [97] calculated concentration indices, Apicella et al. [62] combined self-reported measures with performance indices, and Yue et al. [25] combined self-reported measures with quiz scores to assess engagement.

#### Annotations

Annotation is a crucial step in building a good dataset. Single data points can be annotated manually by one or multiple annotators or by using a framework [98] or annotation tools such as CARMA [99], ANVIL [100], NOVA [101], and ELAN [102,103], as shown in Table 3.

To determine whether the labels are consistent, an agreed-upon final label must be determined by several annotators, for example, by using Cohen's kappa value [64,29,11,65,104,105]. Cohen's kappa has also been used to evaluate the efficiency of classifiers for multiclass and imbalanced data [74].

The final label can also be determined by measuring intraclass correlations (ICCs) [63,23] or by applying the majority-vote aggregation technique [24,70,65]. Highly consistent labelled data usually indicate a high degree of credibility [106].

#### Labelling Issues

Visual computer vision-based engagement estimation datasets encounter several challenges, such as various camera angles and image quality (illumination, background, occlusion, etc.). In addition, the difficulty in capturing subtle changes in visual appearance leads to mislabelling issues. For example, one video clip may show more than one engagement state annotated as one state. As a result, some frames may be mislabelled, potentially influencing the frame-by-frame estimation process [24]. Frame-based labelling is viewed as the easiest solution. However, this approach lacks continuous labels, which provide more precise information [1]. To address this issue, temporal dynamics features need to be extracted [24].

However, in some cases, some frames are more significant for determining engagement levels, while other frames can mislead the final estimation result [107]. One solution for addressing this problem is applying an attention mechanism. The attention mechanism in deep learning directs attention to effectively choose important frames [108,109].

Another labelling issue is false interpretation. For example, learners may be engaged regardless of where they are looking, and observers might label a learner who looks down as disengaged while the learner is actually thinking or processing the learning material. Especially in higher grade levels, learners may show/hide their engagement, and engagement cues may thus be more difficult to identify [110]. Moreover, age can affect attention levels [110]. Therefore, collecting an engagement dataset that represents learners' authentic internal states is a challenging task.

### RQ3: What Automatic Engagement Estimation Methods Have Been Developed in the Literature?

Machine learning, which is a subset of artificial intelligence (AI), is known for its capability to acquire knowledge to make decisions by extracting patterns from raw data [111]. Machine learning techniques have been applied in various fields, including agriculture, transportation, business, and education. Machine learning has led to the development of affective computing methods that automatically recognize human emotions and behaviours [112-115], supporting the advancement of artificial intelligence in education applications [116,117]. Therefore, in general, automatic engagement estimation methods are referred to as machine learning (ML)-based algorithms.

Since machine and deep learning methods are the most commonly used approaches for developing automatic engagement estimation tools in the literature (**Figure 9**), in this section, we briefly discuss the pre-processing steps and estimation methods (classification or regression). We classified the estimation methods as classic machine learning and deep learning techniques.

Deep learning is a subset of machine learning. Both techniques work by mapping raw data features to extract the desired information. Nevertheless, it may be difficult for computers to extract features from raw data with large variations, and these features may be identifiable only using a nearly human-level understanding of data [111]. Therefore, classic machine learning methods require hand-designed features. Moreover, deep learning approaches reduce the desired complicated mapping into a series of nested mappings that can be described by layers [111]. For example, to identify image features, the input is presented as a visible layer. Then, the next layers, namely, the hidden layers, divide the image into smaller maps such as edges, corners and contours, object parts, and finally, the object identity. **Figure 10** depicts a Venn diagram showing how deep learning is distinguished from classic machine learning.

**FIGURE 9**
The general method used in the selected articles

| YEAR | Other | Machine Learning (ML) | Deep Learning (DL) | ML & DL |
|:----:|:-----:|:---------------------:|:------------------:|:-------:|
| 2010 | 1 | 0 | 0 | 0 |
| 2011 | 1 | 0 | 0 | 0 |
| 2012 | 2 | 0 | 0 | 0 |
| 2014 | 2 | 0 | 0 | 0 |
| 2015 | 1 | 0 | 0 | 0 |
| 2016 | 1 | 0 | 0 | 0 |
| 2017 | 3 | 1 | 0 | 0 |
| 2018 | 3 | 0 | 0 | 0 |
| 2019 | 2 | 1 | 0 | 0 |
| 2020 | 6 | 1 | 0 | 0 |
| 2021 | 8 | 4 | 0 | 0 |
| 2022 | 2 | 3 | 0 | 0 |

**FIGURE 10**
The difference between machine learning and deep learning

#### Pre-processing

Before data can be fed into a network, the raw data must be pre-processed to extract the features. Video/image-based data can be pre-processed with face detection, tracking, and cropping techniques [24]. Alternatively, statistical values can be extracted to obtain representation information from features in a given time window [118,9,24]. Statistical rules such as sum, max, min, and mode can be utilized to aggregate meaningful information as input for classifiers, including support vector machines (SVMs) and neural networks [24].

**Face detection and feature extraction.** Appearance-based features can be divided into two categories: low-level features and high-level features. Low-level features include the information generated in each video frame in a given time window. In particular, HCI engagement research has adopted low-dimensional geometry and appearance descriptors as features [1,11]. Additional low-level features include local binary patterns in three orthogonal planes (LBP-TOP), Gabor features, and box filters (BFs) [119].

High-level features are features extracted by aggregating low-level features [24], such as facial action units (FAUs) and head poses. Facial features and head poses are some of the most commonly used features for determining engagement and attention [120-124]. These features can be extracted statistically or by using facial recognition tools, as shown in **Table 1**.

**TABLE 1**
Face recognition tools for face detection and feature extraction

| Tools name | Used in |
|:-----------|:--------|
| OpenFace [125,126] | [127,23,63,71,128,129,107,130,131,132] |
| OpenCV | [133,134,135,136,97] |
| Dlib | [97,73] |
| OpenPose [137] | [138,139,128,107] |
| RetinaFace [140] | [1] |
| FasterRCNN [141] | [142] |
| faceAPI | [15] |
| Affectiva API in iMotion | [26] |

OpenFace is a popular computer vision toolkit for extracting facial features, including in automatic engagement estimation research (Table 1). OpenFace implements multitask cascaded convolutional networks (MTCNNs) [143] for face detection, constrained local models [144,145] for landmark detection and tracking, eye rendering [146] for eye gaze estimation, and cross-dataset learning and person-specific normalisation for facial action unit (FAU) detection. In addition, the OpenCV face detection library (Haar Cascade [147,148,149]) and Dlib library for face and landmark detection are widely used. The mean shift-based object tracker in OpenCV can also be used for face tracking. Furthermore, in HRI, face recognition can be performed by utilizing the software development kit (SDK) built into the robot, for example, the NAOqi People Perception in the Pepper robot [150]. Interested readers are referred to [151] for an in-depth explanation, especially deep learning-based face recognition.

**Data augmentation.** Data augmentation is the process of creating new data based on real data without changing the original data. For image inputs, data augmentation can be performed by flipping (horizontally or vertically), cropping, scaling, or translating/rotating the images. As a result, the sampling rate for the input can be increased by adding the augmented data to the original dataset [152,105,70].

**Feature selection.** Feature selection not only determines the optimal set of features but also ranks and compares the most discriminative features. Some feature selection methods include F-scores [153], RELIEF-F [11], DeepLift [23], and recursive feature elimination random forests (RFE-RFs). Alternatively, ANOVA can be used to analyse the significance of labelled features [154].

**Dimensional reduction.** Dimensional reduction is the process of decreasing the dimension of the input feature to prevent overfitting [24]. Dimensional reduction can be applied to a dataset before the data are fed into the network. Some dimensional reduction methods include principal component analysis (PCA) [1,64] and forward feature selection (FFS) [29]. However, dimensional reduction can also be performed by layer reduction using various pooling layers (max, average, and variance pooling, 1x1 convolutional layers) when a convolutional neural network is utilized [24].

**Addressing imbalanced data.** One major issue with engagement datasets is imbalanced data that are severely skewed towards the majority class [24]. Imbalanced class labels often occur because disengagement is rarely observed in continuous labeling. Many methods have been proposed to address this issue [155-158]. There are three categories of resampling techniques [150]: (1) undersampling methods, which aim to balance class distributions by eliminating majority class examples; (2) oversampling methods, which generate minority class examples, e.g., the synthetic minority oversampling technique (SMOTE) [157]; and (3) hybrid methods that combine both sampling methods [156,157]. Moreover, continuous scales may be discretized into groups [159,160], and weighting techniques [158,161] have also been used to address this problem.

#### Classic Machine Learning Methods

Engagement is estimated by calculating probabilities. To calculate the engagement probability, several classic machine learning methods can be utilized, such as the support vector machine (SVM) and its variations (including support vector regression (SVR)), naive Bayes (NB), decision trees (DTs), logistic regression (LR), clustering techniques (e.g., K-nearest neighbour (KNN)), and random forest (RF). These machine learning techniques are conveniently available in machine learning toolboxes such as Waikato Environment for Knowledge Analysis (WEKA) [162] (as used in [163,28,96]), the Computer Expression Recognition Toolbox (CERT) [164] (as used in [11]), and the MATLAB library [22,29].

Between 2010 and 2022, classic machine learning methods dominated the automatic engagement estimation literature (**Figure 9**), especially SVMs (**Figure 11**). Note that some of the selected articles examined more than one algorithm. Therefore, the totals in **Figure 11** do not correspond to the number of selected articles (see **Appendix Table 4**).

**FIGURE 11**
Pie chart of the use of classic machine learning methods for automatic engagement estimation

| Category | Percentage |
|:--------:|:----------:|
| NB | 4.9% |
| KNN | 4.9% |
| DT | 5.11% |
| Other | 8.18% |
| LR | 3.7% |
| SVM/SVR | 9.2% |
| CART | 2.4% |
| GBT | 2.4% |
| RF | 5.11% |
| ANN | 3.7% |

#### Deep Learning Methods

With the development of deep learning, research on automatic engagement estimation has applied these techniques to improve the estimation performance (**Figure 9**). In this section, we briefly introduce some deep learning methods, including those used in the selected articles. For a more detailed explanation on deep learning techniques (especially for face recognition), interested readers are referred to [151,165,119].

**Multilayer perceptron (MLP).** The multilayer perceptron (MLP), also called the feedforward neural network or deep forward network, was one of the first deep learning algorithms. The MLP is a mathematical function that is formed by combining many simpler functions to map some set of input values to output values [111]. An MLP consists of at least three layers of nodes, i.e., the input f⁽¹⁾, hidden f⁽²⁾, and output f⁽³⁾ layers, to define the mapping y ≈ f*(x) = f(x) = f⁽³⁾(f⁽²⁾(f⁽¹⁾(x))). The first and last layers are called the input and output layers, respectively, while the number of hidden layers may be varied, which determines the depth of the model. Furthermore, each layer may contain more than one unit depending on the number of inputs and outputs. This algorithm has also been used in automatic engagement estimation for performance comparison with other algorithms [32,1,23].

**Convolutional neural network (CNN).** A convolutional neural network (CNN) is a specialized kind of deep learning (DL) algorithm for processing data that employs mathematical linear operations known as convolutions as opposed to matrix multiplication [111]. The convolution operation is typically denoted with an asterisk: x'(t) = (x * w)(t), where x' is the feature map, i.e., the estimated value from the convolution of the input x with a kernel w at time t [111].

CNNs are currently one of the most popular methods in different fields (**Figure 12**). This technique has been widely used in various computer vision applications, including image classification [166], semantic segmentation [167], object detection [168], face recognition [79], spatiotemporal feature learning [169-174], and automatic engagement estimation (see **Appendix Table 4**).

**FIGURE 12**
Pie chart of the use of deep learning methods for automatic engagement estimation

| Category | Percentage |
|:--------:|:----------:|
| CNN | 13.5% |
| MLP | 2.7% |
| LRCN | 1.4% |
| TCN | 1.4% |
| LSTM | 6.23% |
| GRU | 1.4% |
| DNN | 1.4% |
| NTM | 1.4% |

CNNs are popular because they can be highly modified and pretrained. Some CNNs include AlexNet [175], i3D [176], VGG16 [177], and ResNet [166,168].

The inputs to a CNN are usually greyscale or RGB images. The use of multiple small filtering kernels allows the network to extract more discriminative features because multiple small kernels are easier to optimize than one large filter kernel [178,134]. However, CNNs have some crucial issues, such as large training times, gradient vanishing due to the use of deep networks, and a large number of parameters [74].

**Recurrent neural network (RNN).** A facial expression changes through three stages, i.e., onset, apex, and offset [179]. In recurrent neural network (RNN) algorithms for engagement estimation, time-series images are more reasonable than static images as input since time-series present sequence-related task information [180]. RNNs capture information at earlier and later time steps by remembering each piece of information over time [181]. Therefore, this algorithm has become a more popular automatic engagement estimation method (see **Appendix Table 4**).

Some types of RNNs include long short-term memory (LSTM) [182] [25,32,40,183,1,132], gated recurrent units (GRUs) [32], and network Turing machines (NTMs) [184,71].

However, despite advantages such as considerable computational power in temporal processing models and applications, in practice, RNNs are difficult to train due to network instability [181]. Moreover, the networks may suffer from short-term memory issues if the input sequences are too long. Thus, RNNs may have difficulty capturing earlier time step information due to vanishing gradients [181].

Therefore, the attention mechanism was introduced to learn to associate the elements in sequence C with the elements in the output sequence [185]. The attention mechanism essentially determines a weighted average that is used to focus on specific parts of the input sequence at each time step [111]. Although the attention mechanism was originally introduced in the context of machine translation [185], it has also been utilized in DL applications for automatic engagement estimation [183,1,73,152].

**Other classifiers.** Other neural network techniques that have been used for automatic engagement estimation include the fuzzy min-max neural network (FMMNN) classifier [186,187], which was implemented by [7] for automatic engagement estimation, the deep belief network [188], which was used in [189], and linear discriminant analysis (LDA) [62,64].

#### Fine-Tuning and Transfer Learning Techniques

One fine-tuning technique for addressing insufficient training data is applying transfer learning, which utilizes networks pretrained on a large number of images [190,151]. Various models have been trained on large face image datasets. For example, Sumer et al. [1] used AffectNet [67] and 300W-LP [82], which were trained on ResNet50, for transfer learning. The pretrained models help the engagement estimation network learn general features related to face identification [24]. As mentioned in Sect. "RQ2", other large datasets that have been used for transfer learning include FER-2013 [78], VGGFace [79], VGGFace2 [80], FaceNet [81], AffectNet [67], 300W-LP and AFLW2000 [82].

#### Performance Metrics

To judge the automatic engagement estimation performance, the prediction results should be compared with human judgements in the dataset [11,24]. In machine learning pipeline, performance metrics are used to monitor and measure the performance of a model depend on the task. Automatic engagement estimation problem can be seen either as classification or regression task. An engagement estimation is a classification task if the engagement is estimated in discreet class, e.g., low engagement class vs high engagement class. Otherwise, an engagement estimation is a regression task when continuous output desired. Some metrics used to measure the performance of regression task are Mean Absolute Error (MAE), Mean Squared Error (MSE), and Root Mean Squared Error (RMSE), which mainly calculating the distance between the predicted and the ground truth.

Classification performance metrics evaluate the estimation model that compares discrete classes, such as accuracy, precision and recall, F1-score, and Area Under the Curve-Receiver Operating Characteristics (AUC-ROC). Moreover, confusion matrix is also used to visualize the ground-truth labels versus the predicted results in a table.

Accuracy metric defines the number of correct predictions (true positive (TP)) divided by the total number of predictions. It is the most common metric for evaluating classification performance due to its simplicity. However, Accuracy may not be reliable when the dataset is severely unbalanced. In a severely skewed dataset, the classifier may not discriminate well despite high accuracy values because the classifier identifies only the most common class.

Alternatively, Precision/Recall (PR) trade-off curve (used in [6]) and F1-score [154] are used to overcome the limitation of Accuracy. Precision determines the performance by calculating the proportion of TP prediction to the total positive prediction (TP + false positive (FP)). Similarly, Recall calculates the TP prediction to the total number of TP and false negative (FN). Meanwhile, F1-score is the harmonic mean between the precision and recall.

Some alternative metrics that are more informative and "imbalance-friendly" include the balanced accuracy, AUC-ROC [118,6] and 2-alternative forced choice (2AFC) [11].

AUC-ROC visualizes the classification performance based on correct and incorrect classifications (**Figure 13**). The ROC curve plotted the trade-off between the TP rate (Recall) to the FP rate. AUC represents the degree or measure of separability between classes as a summary of the ROC curve [191]. The AUC scores between 0.7 - 0.8, 0.8 - 0.9, and > 0.9 are considered acceptable, excellent, and outstanding, respectively [192,131].

**FIGURE 13**
AUC-ROC curve illustration

Precision = TP / (TP + FP)
Recall (TP rate) = TP / (TP + FN)
FP rate = 1 - TP rate = FP / (TN + FP)
F1-Score = 2 * (Precision * Recall) / (Precision + Recall)

The 2-alternative forced choice (2AFC) [193,194] is an unbiased estimate of the AUC-ROC curve since it expresses the probability of discriminating true positives (TP) from true negatives (TN). A 2AFC value of 1 indicates perfect discrimination, while a value of 0.5 indicates that the classifier performs at chance levels.

Furthermore, other metrics such as Matthews correlation coefficient (MCC) [194] and specificity and sensitivity [24] are also used in the engagement estimation literature (see **Appendix Table 4**).

## Conclusion

This article reviewed recent research on automatic engagement estimation in education/learning settings, focusing on work published between 2010 and 2022. In particular, this review examined engagement definitions, datasets, and machine learning-based methods from forty-seven selected articles. The article selection and review methodology were adopted from the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) model [35] to answer three research questions:

- RQ1: how should the type of engagement to be measured be defined?
- RQ2: what datasets are suitable for developing automatic engagement estimation methods?
- RQ3: what automatic engagement estimation methods have been developed in the literature?

The results and discussion with the presented information, figures, and tables aim at providing new researchers with insight on automatic engagement estimation to enhance smart learning with automatic engagement recognition methods.

To answer the RQ1, we examined the definitions of engagement used in the selected articles and introduced an engagement definition taxonomy (**Figure 5**) as a guide for educators and engagement estimation research, particularly for education/learning purposes. The taxonomy defined three types of engagement: behavioural engagement, emotional engagement, and cognitive engagement. Each engagement type was connected with some engagement cues, including affective cues, physiological cues, log files, and basic emotions. The modalities for obtaining engagement cues were also discussed, including speech cues, visual cues (face, head, and eye gaze), physiological sensor data, and log data.

From the discussion, we found that to define what type of engagement is being measured depends on engagement cues used, what stimulies presented to the participant during data collection, and what physical or cognitive behaviours observed. We believe that the proposed taxonomy will allow for enhanced research on automatic engagement estimation.

The datasets used in the literature were summarized in this review to address the RQ2. The datasets include publicly available datasets and self-collected datasets. In this review, publicly available datasets were divided into two categories, namely, engagement datasets and engagement-related datasets, to distinguish the availability of engagement labels. The engagement measurement methods and annotations were highlighted because incorrect interpretations in this step lead to severe bias. The number of participants, type of samples, number of annotators, and label information were summarized in a table to provide a reference for building engagement datasets.

Finally, in addressing the RQ3, we discuss machine learning-based methods that have been applied to develop automatic engagement estimation approaches in the literature. We found that between 2010 and 2022, classic machine learning algorithms (including support vector machines (SVMs) and decision trees (DTs)) were used more in previous work. However, since 2019, the trend has moved to deep learning algorithms, especially convolutional neural network (CNN)- and recurrent neural network (RNN)-based algorithms.

## Limitations and Remaining Challenges

There is bias in the subjective determination of whether an article was aimed at education/learning settings. For example, some articles appear to be aimed at other purposes, such as therapy for children with autism [23] or human-robot interactions [32]. However, the articles were included if the authors perceived that there was subtle information about a learning activity or the possibility that the proposed action could be applied in the education process.

Moreover, the combination of a clear engagement definition, and suitable machine learning methods allows learners' engagement during learning activities to be measured automatically, including human-human interactions, human-computer interactions and human-robot interactions. The estimation performance is especially promising for deep learning-based methods. However, the practicality of the implementation in real education settings is not discussed in this review. Therefore, the implication and application of these automatic engagement estimation methods should be addressed in future work to address various research questions, such as "How does engagement estimation improve learning outcomes?", "What conditions and requirements are needed in automatic engagement estimation applications?", and "In what learning settings can automatic estimation be applied?".

Furthermore, we discuss several remaining challenges, including cognitive engagement, personalized engagement, and machine-learning pitfalls.

**Cognitive engagement.** Table 2 shows that most automatic engagement research has focused on behavioural and emotional engagement and that affective data, especially appearance-based video data, were mostly utilized to estimate engagement. However, cognitive engagement, which can be determined through self-regulated learning or pre-post tests, plays an important role in successful distance learning. Similar to behavioural and emotional engagement, cognitive engagement can be measured using questionnaires [131]. However, few studies (Table 2) have considered this type of engagement. Therefore, we believe that more engagement cues for cognitive engagement should be developed in future automatic engagement estimation research.

**Personalized engagement.** Various definitions of engagement have been constructed in the field of education. Although engagement can be divided into three types (i.e., behavioural, emotional, and cognitive engagement), conceptualizations of engagement sometimes include only one or two of the three types. All three types can be considered to determine engagement levels [4]. To the best of our knowledge, no research has answered how these engagement types evolve and change over time. Therefore, whether the engagement cues may take different forms depending on the age range, gender, ethnicity, and education level of the participants is unknown.

Moreover, facial physiognomy differences between people with different ethnic backgrounds may result in various distributions of engagement levels [142]. Several automatic engagement estimations are targeted participants with specific cultures or backgrounds. For example, as shown by Libin and Libin [195], a child's background, including their cultural or psychological profile, needs to be considered when designing therapeutic strategies.

Network personalization can be achieved using demographic information (culture and gender), followed by individual network layers for each child [23]. However, it is unknown how engagement estimation results can be generalized in actual applications [52]. Thus, the user target must be defined, and the data must be collected from participants with the appropriate cultural background (for example, learners with autism spectrum conditions (ASCs) [196,197]) to train the model [142]. Therefore, automatic engagement estimation, which considers individual differences, remains an open challenge.

**Machine learning pitfalls.** Machine learning (ML) methods have been applied in various fields; however, reproducibility is an issue, as reviewed by Kapoor et al. [198]. The review examined 20 reviews across 17 research fields and found errors in 329 papers that used ML-based methods. While experienced machine learning practitioners are well aware of these errors, researchers in other disciplines may not be [199]. Although education research was not included in the review [200], we found similar issues (such as no training-testing splits, sampling biases, and pre-processing the training and test sets together) in the selected articles (see **Appendix Table 4**). The misuse of ML can generate invalid results that are irreproducible in implementations in real-world educational settings. Therefore, automatic engagement researchers should be aware of these issues [200]. Furthermore, education experts and ML experts could collaborate on engagement research to develop more effective models [199].

## Appendix

**TABLE 2**
An overview of the selected articles to address RQ1

| Author | Journal | Domain | Engagement type | Engagement cues |
|:-------|:--------|:------:|:---------------:|:----------------:|
| | | HCI | HRI | A/H | CIs. | B. | E. | C. | Aff. | BE | PC | LF |
| (USTC-NVIE) Wang et al. [64] | IEEE Transactions on Multimedia | ✓ | | | | | ○ | | ● | | | |
| Cocea et al. [163] | IEEE Transactions on Learning Technologies | ✓ | | | | ○ | | | | | | ● |
| AlZoubi et al. [29] | IEEE Transactions on Affective Computing | | | A | | | ○ | | | | ● | |
| S-Syun et al. [7] | International Journal of Advanced Robotic Systems | | ✓ | | | | ○ | | ● | | | |
| Whitehill et al. [11] | IEEE Transactions on Affective Computing | ✓ | | | | | ○ | | ● | | | |
| Schiavo et al. [154] | Intelligenza Artificiale | ✓ | | | | | ○ | ○ | | ● | | |
| Woo-Han Yun et al. [201] | International Journal of Machine Learning and Computing | ✓ | | | | | ○ | | ● | | | |
| (DAiSEE) Gupta et al. [68] | Conference proceedings | ✓ | | | | | ○ | | ● | | | |
| Zaletelj et al. [30] | EURASIP Journal on Image and Video Processing | | | | ✓ | ○ | | | ● | | | |
| Monkaresi et al. [28] | IEEE Transactions on Affective Computing | ✓ | | | | | ○ | | ● | | ● | |
| (UE-HRI) Youssef et al. [69] | Conference proceedings | | ✓ | | | | | | | | | |
| (BAUM-1) Zhalehpour et al. [65] | IEEE Transactions on Affective Computing | ✓ | | | | | | | | | | |
| Hussain et al. [202] | Computational Intelligence and Neuroscience | ✓ | | | | ○ | | ○ | | | | ● |
| Psaltis et al. [27] | IEEE Transactions on Games | | ✓ | | | | ○ | | ● | ● | | |
| Rudovic et al. [23] | SCIENCE ROBOTICS | | ✓ | | | ○ | | | ● | | ● | |
| Ninaus et al. [203] | Computers & Education | ✓ | | | | | ○ | | | ● | | |
| Yue et al. [25] | IEEE Access | | ✓ | | | ○ | ○ | ○ | ● | ● | | ● |
| (AffectNet) Mollahosseini et al. [67] | IEEE Transactions on Affective Computing | ✓ | | | | | ○ | | ● | | | |
| Celiktutan et al. [39] | IEEE Transactions on Affective Computing | | ✓ | | | ○ | | | ● | | ● | |
| Youssef et al. [32] | International Journal of Social Robotics | | ✓ | | | | ○ | | ● | | | |
| Olivetti et al. [61] | Applied Science | ✓ | | | | | ○ | | | ● | | |
| Ashwin et al. [105] | Education and Information Technologies | | | | ✓ | ○ | ○ | | ● | | | |
| Ashwin et al. [104] | Future Generation Computer Systems | | | | ✓ | | ○ | | ● | ● | | |
| Pabba et al. [70] | Expert Systems (Special Issues) | | | | ✓ | | ○ | | ● | ● | | |
| Duchetto et al. [40] | Frontiers in Robotics and AI | | ✓ | | | | ○ | | ● | | | |
| Yun et al. [24] | IEEE Transactions on Affective Computing | | ✓ | | | ○ | ○ | | ● | | | |
| Zhang et al. [106] | Journal of Educational Computing Research | ✓ | | | | ○ | ○ | | ● | | | |
| Liao et al. [183] | Applied Intelligence | ✓ | | | | | ○ | | ● | | | |
| Li et al. [131] | Computers & Education | ✓ | | | | | ○ | ○ | | ● | | |
| Bhardwaj et al. [136] | Computers & Electrical Engineering | ✓ | | | | | ○ | | ● | | | |
| Goldberg et al. [63] | Educational Psychology Review | | | | ✓ | ○ | ○ | ○ | | | | |
| Chatterjee et al. [22] | Frontiers in Neuroscience | | | H | | | ○ | | | | ● | |
| Youssef et al. [150] | IEEE Transactions on Affective Computing | | ✓ | | | ○ | | | ● | | | |
| Sümer et al. [1] | IEEE Transactions on Affective Computing | | | | ✓ | | ○ | | ● | | | |
| Trindade et al. [96] | International Journal for Innovation Education and Research | ✓ | | | | | | ○ | | | | ● |
| Ma et al. [71] | International Journal of Information and Education Technology | ✓ | | | | | ○ | | ● | | | |
| Thiruthuvanathan et al. [74] | International Journal of Intelligent Engineering & Systems | ✓ | | | | | ○ | | ● | | | |
| Altuwairqi et al. [60] | Signal, Image and Video Processing | ✓ | | | | ○ | ○ | | ● | | | |
| Vanneste et al. [138] | Mathematics | | | | ✓ | ○ | ○ | | ● | | | |
| Hasnine et al. [97] | Procedia Computer Science | ✓ | | | | | ○ | | | ● | | |
| Delgado et al. [204] | Conference proceedings | ✓ | | | | | ○ | | ● | | | |
| Engwall et al. [132] | ACM Transactions on Human-Robot Interaction | | ✓ | | | | ○ | | ● | | | |
| Mehta et al. [73] | Applied Intelligence | ✓ | | | | | ○ | | ● | | | |
| Dubovi et al. [26] | Computers & Education | ✓ | | | | | ○ | ○ | | ● | | |
| Thomas et al. [205] | Computers and Education: Artificial Intelligence | ✓ | | | | | ○ | | ● | | | |
| Shen et al. [152] | Multimedia Systems | ✓ | | | | | ○ | | ● | | | |
| Apicella et al. [62] | Scientific Reports | ✓ | | | | | ○ | | ● | | | |

*Note: HCI = human-computer interaction; HRI = human-robot interaction; A = embodied conversational agent; H = human-human interaction; CIs. = classroom; B = behavioral; E = emotional; C = cognitive; Aff = affective; BE = basic emotions; PC = physiological cues; LF = log file (including log activity)*

**TABLE 3**
An overview of the dataset in the selected articles to address RQ2

| Dataset | Type | Setting | Stimuli | Participants | Samples | Annotators | Label | Publicity |
|:--------|:----:|:-------:|:--------|:------------:|:-------:|:----------:|:------|:---------:|
| (USTC-NVIE) Wang et al. [64] | ER | S&P | 3-4 mins emotional and 1-2 mins neutral videos from internet | 215 healthy students (157 M and 58 F) | 236 apex images. Visible and thermal. | 5 EAs & self-report. | 6 basic emotions (happiness, sadness, surprise, fear, anger, and disgust), average arousal and valence. | Yes |
| Cocea et al. [163] | E | WE | An online course (HTML-tutor) in 7 sessions | 48 users | 14 logged events | 3 EA | Engaged, disengaged, or neutral | N/A |
| AlZoubi et al. [29] | E | S | An intelligent tutoring system with conversational dialogues (AutoTutor) in 45 mins learning session | 27 students | 20-second interval of biosensor signals | Retrospective self-report | 8 affective states: boredom, confusion, curiosity, delight, flow/engagement, surprise, and neutral. | N/A |
| S-Syun et al. [7] | ER | S | An intelligent robot platform (MERO); greeting, identification, and a question game. | 10 participants | 1,400 elements | (humans numerical values) | 4 facial expression states: smiling, surprised, neutral and angry | N/A |
| Whitehill et al. [11] | E | S | A cognitive skills training software | 34 undergraduate students | 10 seconds videos | 7 EA | Engaged, Not Engaged (Very engaged, Engaged), [Nominally engaged, Not Engaged] | N/A |
| Schiavo et al. [154] | E | S | A video game: single player level, "Operation 40" of "Call of Duty - Black Ops" video game. | 22 participants (3 F, 19 M) | 12420 samples | self-annotate using Experience Sampling Method (ESM) [206] | Neutral, Engaged, Stress | N/A |
| Woo-Han Yun et al. [201] | E | S | A testing interactive software. | 12 Children | 2,745 of 30 second video clips | 1 EA | 4 engagement levels: high/low interest, low/high boredom | N/A |
| (DAiSEE) Gupta et al. [68] | E | W | 2 videos (educational and recreational) | 112 students (32 F and 64 M) | 9,068 clips (10 secs) | 10 EA | 4 levels of 4 affective states: engagement, frustration, confusion, boredom | Yes |
| Zaletelj et al. [30] | E | S | 4 lecturing sessions (@25-min) in offline classroom setting | 18 students | videos and kinect features | 5 EA | 3-level scale attention score (high, medium, low) | N/A |
| Monkaresi et al. [28] | E | S | Writing task (draft-feedback-review) | 22 students | 1,325 video segments | Concurrent and retrospective self-report | Not engaged, engaged | N/A |
| (UE-HRI) Youssef et al. [69] | E | S | Interaction with Pepper robot | 195 participants (125 M, 70 F) | | | Sign of Engagement Decrease (SED), Early sign of future engagement Breakdown (EBD), engagement Breakdown (BD), Temporary disengagement (TD) | Yes |
| (BAUM-1) Zhalehpour et al. [65] | ER | S&P | Short video clips | 31 subjects (Turkish) | 1,184 clips | 5 EA | 13 emotional and mental states, which are Anger (An), Disgust (Di), Fear (Fe), Happiness (Ha), Sadness (Sa), Surprise (Su), Boredom (Bo), Contempt (Co), Unsure (Un), Neutral (Ne), Thinking (Th), Concentrating (Con), Bothered (Bot) | Yes |
| Hussain et al. [202] | E | WE | Social science course on virtual learning environment (VLE) | 383 students | Log file | N/A | IF (score on the assessment>=90) OR (final results=Pass AND total number of clicks>= average clicks), then label = high engagement. Otherwise = Low engagement | N/A |
| Psaltis et al. [27] | ER | S&P | Social games: Path of Trust (original version and stripped-down version) | 72 participants | 750 videos from 15 subjects (3 seconds) | Retrospective self-reports | 5 basic emotions (anger, fear, happiness, sadness, surprise) | Yes |
| Rudovic et al. [23] | E | S | 25 min therapy session with NAO robot to learn four basic emotions: sadness, fear, anger, and happiness | 35 Child (17 from Japan, 18 from Serbia) ages 3 to 13 with autism | 10s video fragment | 5 EA | 6 engagement level [0-5] = evaluation, non-compliance, indifferent, low engagement, mid engagement, high engagement | N/A |
| Ninaus et al. [203] | ER | S | 1) The number line estimation task, 2) watching a short clip. | 122 participants | Image frames | Self-report | joy = "excited" or "inspired", activity/interest = "attentive", active, afraid = "distressed", "scared", upset = "irritable", "hostile" | N/A |
| Yue et al. [25] | ER | S&W | MOOC course titled "Data Processing Using Python" with course 5=10 mins videos, teaching materials and quizzes. | 46 participants | 7224 learning performance instances | self-report and quiz score | 7 emotions (Neutral, Happy, Disgust, Sad, Surprise, Fear, Anger), Eye Movement (writing, read, type), course: score | N/A |
| (AffectNet) Mollahosseini et al. [67] | ER | W | Images collected from internet | 450,000 subjects | Training set: 23,901 images Validation set: 3,500 images | 12 EA for 450,000 images. 2EA for 36,000 images | 8 emotion categories (neutral, happy, sad, surprise, fear, disgust, anger, contempt), valence and arousal (continuous) | Yes |
| Celiktutan et al. [39] | E | S | HHI: dyadic interactions, HRI: triadic interactions | 18 students | 290 clips of HHI, 456 clips of HRI, and 746 clips in total for each data modality (276 physiological clips of HHI) | self-report | Big Five personality traits (extroversion, neuroticism, openness, agreeableness, conscientiousness), 10-point likert scale of engagement | Yes |
| Youssef et al. [32] | E | S | Interaction with Pepper robot | 278 users (182 M, 96 F) | 209 interactions featuring a single user, and 69 multiparty interactions | 2 EA using ELAN | Sign of Engagement Decrease (SED), engaged | Yes |
| Olivetti et al. [61] | E | S | A virtual learning environment (A European Enterprise Technology VET Model and Assessment) | 12 participants (6 F, 6 M) | 3D videos | 2 EA and self-report | Engagement level 1,2,3 | N/A |
| Ashwin et al. [105] | E | S&P | Offline classroom | 50 students | 24000 posed images of 50 students, 36000 images spontaneous | self-annotate and 2 EA | Engaged, boredom and neutral | N/A |
| Ashwin et al. [104] | E | S&P | Offline classroom | 350 students (Indian) | 2900 posed images (1450 are multiple students in a single frame), 72000 spontaneous images | 30 EA | Attentive (happiness, surprise, delight, engaged), inattentive (sadness, fear, disgust, boredom, sleepy, frustrated, confused). | N/A |
| Pabba et al. [70] | E | S | Offline classroom | 50 (31 M and 19 F) (Indian) | 1193 images (30 minutes) | 5 EA | Engagement level academic affective states (low: boredom, sleepy; Medium: Yawning, frustrated, confused; High: Focused) | N/A |
| Duchetto et al. [40] | E | S | Interactive multi-intelligence material | 227 people (122 F, 105 M, 138 adults, 89 minors) | 3,106 videos (10 fpm) | 3 EA Using NOVA | Engagement score High, low, medium | N/A |
| Yun et al. [24] | E | S | Interactive multi-intelligence material | 20 children (Asian) | 356 video/images | 3 and 7 EA | Engaged, disengaged (High Engagement, Low Engagement), [Low Disengagement, and High Disengagement] [17,11,5,1] | N/A |
| Zhang et al. [106] | E | | | 47 students (28 M,19 F) | 26 hours video (2 seconds image) and mouse movement | 8 EA | 1-5 engagement scale (but only 2 class classification Engaged, not engaged) | N/A |
| Liao et al. [183] | E-R | S | A virtual patient in BioWorld | 61 medical students | 167 segments, videos (10 seconds) | self-report, 1 EA | 8 clinical behaviors, 2 performances (shallow/surface, high/deep) | N/A |
| Bhardwaj et al. [136] | E | S | Online class | 1000 participants | Emotion scores | 10 EA | 0-5 scale engagement level and emotions, angry, disgust, fear, sad, surprise and neutral | Yes |
| Goldberg et al. [63] | E | S | offline classroom (90 mins), knowledge test | 52 students (only 30 were used due to occlusions) | Videos | self-report and 6 EA using CARMA | -2 to +2 engagement scale | N/A |
| Chatterjee et al. [22] | E | S | Dyadic conversation | 16 dyads | Naturalistic conversations (15 minutes) | Self-report | Engagement level (none to very high), Engagement scale (0-100) | N/A |
| Youssef et al. [150] | E | S | Interaction using Pepper robot | 195 participants (70 F, 125 M) | 124 interactions feature a single user, 71 multiparty interactions (4) | | | N/A |
| Delgado et al. [204] | E | WE | Math problem on Math-Spring.org | 19 students | 400 videos (18,721 frames) | 3 EA | Engaged (looking at the screen or looking at their paper), wandering | N/A |
| Engwall et al. [132] | E | S | Robot interaction (with Furhat anthropomorphic robotic head) in Wizard-of-Oz setup | 33 language learners | 50 audio-visual conversational videos (38 video recordings, 353 of 5s clips) | 1 EA (audio recordings), 3 EA (video recordings), 9 EA (2s clips) | High and Low engagement. Clips (very disengaged, disengaged, neutral, engaged, very engaged) | N/A |
| Mehta et al. [73] | ER | S | Used Public Availability dataset: Dataset for Affective States in E-Environments (DAiSEE) | | | | | Yes |
| Dubovi et al. [26] | ER | S | The Medication Administration Test (MAT), PANAS questionnaires | 61 nursing students | Data streams, and pre-and post-test context knowledge test | Self-report using PANAS | 10 positive emotions and 10 negative emotions Positive and Negative Affect Scale (PANAS) [207] | N/A |
| Thomas et al. [205] | Used Existed dataset | | | | | | | N/A |
| Apicella et al. [62] | ER | S | Cognitive task (Continuous Performance Test), background music, social feedback | 21 students | 45 seconds acquisition EEG signals | Self-report, Performance index | High or low emotion engagement, high or low cognitive engagement | N/A |
| Shen et al. [152] | Used Public Availability dataset | Used Public Availability dataset: JAFFE, CK+, RAF-DB | | | | | | N/A |

*Note: ER = engagement-related dataset; E = engagement dataset; S = spontaneous; P = posed; W = in-the-wild; WE = web-environment; EA = external annotator; N/A = not available*

**TABLE 4**
An overview of the method used in the selected articles to address RQ3

| Author | Input device/modality | Input features | Estimation method | Performance metrics |
|:-------|:----------------------|:---------------|:------------------|:---------------------|
| Wang et al. [64] | Thermal camera | Grayscale images pixels | Feature extraction: PCA, PCA + LDA, AAM, and AAM+LDA. Classification: KNN. Validation: LOOCV | Accuracy |
| Cocea et al. [163] | Log file | 30 log attributes | WEKA 8 algorithms: 1) BNs, 2) LR, 3) simple logistic classification (SL), 4) Instance-based classification with Ibk algorithm (IBk), 5) Attribute selected classification using J48 classifier and Best first search (ASC), 6) Bagging using REP (reduced error pruning) tree classifier (B), 7) Classification via Regression (CVR), 8) DTs | Accuracy (highest 91%) |
| AlZoubi et al. [29] | 3 sensors (ECG, fEMG, GSR), webcam, screen recorder | 117 features (EEG, corrugator muscle EMG, finger tips GSR) | Preprocess: low/high pass filter. Feature extraction using Augsburg Biosignal Toolbox [208], a pattern recognition library for Matlab, 9 classifiers: 1) SVM with linear kernel (SVM1), 2) SVM with polynomial (SVM2), 3) KNN (K = 3), 4) KNN (K = 5), 5) KNN (K = 7), 6) NB, 7) Linear Bayes Normal Classifier (LBNC), 8) Multinomial LR, 9) C4.5 DT. Validation: 10-fold cross validation with 20-7 train/test ratio | Kappa statistic and F1-scores, KNN and LBNC yielded the best detection |
| S-Syun et al. [7] | Microphone, camera, Depth sensor | Ocules, kinesics, proxemic, vocal, person identity cue features | Ocules (gaze direction), Kinesics (facial expression, movement, body posture/gesture), proxemic (body posture/gesture, spatial relation), vocal (user call), person identity cue (Spatial relation, face identification). Feature extraction: OpenNI library. Binary classifications (inattention and attention): Fuzzy-based classification algorithm (FMMNN classifier), Fuzzy min-max neural networks (FMMNN) with 7 input nodes, Validation: 7:3 training/test samples | Accuracy 86% |
| Whitehill et al. [11] | Camera | Facial features | Feature extraction: using CERT. Binary Classification: Boost (BP), SVM (Gabor), MLR (CERT). Validation: 4-fold cross-validation | 2-alternative forced choice (2AFC) |
| Schiavo et al. [154] | Camera | Head movement and face features | Features extraction: using face actions and expression recognition [209]. 3-class classification: SVM. Validation: LOOCV | Accuracy=73%, F-score=63% |
| Woo-Han Yun et al. [201] | Camera | 55 features of face and head information | Pre-processing: median filtering and aggregation method (mean, median, max, min, standard deviation (STD), range, rate of zero crossings (ZCR), 4-class classification: relevance vector classifier (RVC), a sparse version of Bayesian kernel logistic regression or Gaussian process classification (GPC). | Accuracy=78.53%, Balanced Accuracy=70.64% |
| Gupta et al. [68] | Camera | Image pixels | Classification: InceptionNet, C3D, LRCN. | Accuracy |
| Zaletelj et al. [30] | Kinect one sensor | 2D and 3D gaze point and body posture data | 3-class classification: DT (simple and medium), KNN (coarse, medium, and weight), Bagged Trees, Subspace KNN | Accuracy=75.3% |
| Monkaresi et al. [28] | Kinect face tracker and ECG sensors | Kinect face tracker features, LBP-TOP, heart rate data | Pre-process: RELIEF-F for feature selection, SMOTE to handle data imbalance. Classifications using WEKA: Updateable NB, BN, LR, classification via Clustering, rotation forest, bagging. Validation: LOOCV | AUC=0.758 and 0.733 |
| Youssef et al. [69] | No estimation method. Only proposed dataset. | | | |
| Zhalehpour et al. [65] | Camera | Images | Face tracking: CHEHRA tracker. Classification: SVM. Accuracy: 5-class classification = 75.32%, 8-class = 65.84% | Accuracy, Recall, AUC, Kappa |
| Hussain et al. [202] | Log file | Number of clicks and activity types | Activity types includes datapoint, forum, glossary, outcollaborate, oucontent, resource, subpage, homepage, and URL. Binary classification: decision tree (DT), J48 (belongs to DT family), CART, LRIP decision rules, GBDT, NB. Validation: 10-fold cross validation | Accuracy, Recall, AUC, Kappa |
| Psaltis et al. [27] | Kinect face tracker | Facial expression, Body motion features, average time of responsiveness | Feature for emotional engagement: facial expression and body motion. Feature for behavioral engagement: average time of responsiveness. Binary classification: unimodal ANN classifiers. Validation: 4-fold validation. Testing on: three primary schools. | Accuracy = 85% |
| Rudovic et al. [23] | Audiovisual sensors from NAO robot and physiological sensors | Face, body, physiology features, CARS, demographic features (culture and gender) | Pre-process: OpenFace, OpenPose, openSMILE [210], and self-built tools for feature extraction. DeepLift for feature selection. Regression: personalized perception of affect network (PPA-net) which is based on ANN and clustering using t-SNE. | Intra-class correlation (ICC) = 65% ± 24 (average ± SD) |
| Ninaus et al. [203] | Webcam | Image frames | Pre-process: Microsoft's Emotion-API classifying the prevalence of the 6 basic emotions for each frame (fear and disgust are excluded). Classification: SVM ensembles using 'classyfire' package in R. Questionnaires were analyzed using separate multivariate ANOVAs | Accuracy ≈ 64.18% |
| Yue et al. [25] | Microsoft LifeCam webcam and Tobii Eye Tracker 4C | Video/images, eye movement, and click stream data | Fine-tuning parameters by transfer learning for CNN: VGG16, InceptionResNet2, Classification: CNN and LSTM. Regression: CART, random forest, GBDT. Validation: 10-fold cross validation | Accuracy = 76.08% for facial expressions recognition, 81% for eye movement behavior. R² metric = 0.98 of course performance prediction |
| Mollahosseini et al. [67] | N/A | Images | CNN (AlexNet) and SVR on Valence and Arousal labels | RMSE, CORR, SAGR, CCC |
| Celiktutan et al. [39] | Cameras (2 static & 2 dynamic), 2 biosensors | Image, sensor data | Binary classifications: SVMs. Validation: a double LOOCV | Accuracy, F1-Score, AUC |
| Youssef et al. [32] | Robot's camera | Distance; head, gaze and face streams; speech-looking and listening | Feature extraction: OpenFace and Pepper OKAO software. Binary classification: LR, DNN, GRU, LSTM. Validation: 3-fold cross validation | Accuracy, F1-Score, AUC |
| Olivetti et al. [61] | Camera | Images (geometrical description) | 3-class classification: SVM | The classification result was compared with the questionnaire |
| Ashwin et al. [105] | Camera | 299x299x3 image with RGB with facial expressions, hand gestures and body postures present | Pre-processing = data augmentation, Classification: transfer learning with inception v3, Hybrid CNN = CNN-1 + CNN-2, CNN-1 for single student in a single image frame, CNN-2 for multiple students in a single image frame, Validation: 10-fold cross validation | Posed accuracy = 86%, recall = 89%, precision = 91%, F1-score = 84%, AUC = 90%. Spontaneous accuracy = 70%, recall = 72%, precision = 77%, F1-score = 62%, AUC = 69% |
| Ashwin et al. [104] | Camera | Images with facial expressions, hand gestures and body postures present | Classification: CNN with pre-trained on GoogleNet architecture [175], Validation: 10-fold cross validation | Accuracy = 76% |
| Pabba et al. [70] | Camera | 48x48 image pixels | Add additional public dataset: BAUM-1, DAiSEE, and Yawning Detection Dataset (YawDD), Pre-process: face and head detection (using multi-task cascade CNN (MTCNN), face alignment, data augmentation, 6-class classification, CNN | Accuracy = 76.9% |
| Duchetto et al. [40] | Head camera of the robot | RGB frame-by-frame image | Face detection: CNN, Regression: LSTM, Build the model using TOGURO dataset and evaluated on UE-HRI | AUC=0.89 |
| Yun et al. [24] | Camera, Kinect V2 | Facial features | Classification: CNN with fine-tuning by using a pre-trained network (VGG-3D model), Validation: 6-fold cross-validation, leave-one-labeler-out cross-validation (LOLOCV) | Accuracy, AUC of ROC, AUC of PRs, MCC, F1-score, balanced accuracy, specificity |
| Zhang et al. [106] | Camera | Grayscale image (100 x 100 pixel) | Feature extraction: adaptive weighted LGCP, Binary classification, fast sparse representation (AWLGCP & FSR), Validation: 10-fold validation, Compare: four methods (CLBP-SRC, Gabor-SVM, active shape model-SVM, and AWLGCP & FSR) | Accuracy, AUC of ROC, AUC of PRs, MCC, F1-score, balanced accuracy, specificity |
| Liao et al. [183] | N/A | DAiSEE and EmotiW images | Face detection: MTCNN. Pre-process: resize images to 224x224 and pre-trained on VGGFace2. 4-class classification and regression: Deep Facial Spatiotemporal Network (DFSTN) = pretrained SE-ResNet-50 (SENet) for extracting facial spatial features, and LSTM Network with Global Attention (GALN). Validation: 5-fold cross-validation | Accuracy = 58.84% and MSE = 0.0422 on DAiSEE. MSE = 0.0736 on EmotiW |
| Li et al. [131] | Camera, log file | Facial features (Gaze, Pose, FAU) and 8 clinical behaviors | Performance (correctness) labelling: for problem solving process (Measure cognitive engagement). Feature extraction: using OpenFace. Calculate mean and std of each facial features. Feature selection: recursive feature elimination random forest (RFE-RF). Binary classification: NB, KNN, DT, RF, SVM. Validation: 10-fold-cv for feature selection. Use students self-reports of cognitive engagement states as the ground-truth. | MSE = 0.05. Pearson correlation coefficient between manual annotation's mean level and prediction models r = .70, p = 0 |
| Bhardwaj et al. [136] | FER-2013 dataset (image), and MES dataset | Images | Face detection: OpenCV. Binary classification: CNN. First, calculating weights matrix of emotions, then calculating MES and detecting engagement. | MSE = 0.05. Pearson correlation coefficient between manual annotation's mean level and prediction models r = .70, p = 0 |
| Goldberg et al. [63] | 3 Cameras | Eye gaze, head pose, and facial expressions | Feature extraction: OpenFace. Regression: Model 1: multiple linear regression. Model 2: two additional linear regression. Model 3: add learning prerequisites. | MSE = 0.05. Pearson correlation coefficient between manual annotation's mean level and prediction models r = .70, p = 0 |
| Chatterjee et al. [22] | ECG, skin conductance, respiration, skin temperature, microphone, webcams | ECG, skin conductance, respiration, skin temperature signals | Pre-process: lowpass/highpass filter using MATLAB/Simulink. Regression: a binary decision tree, least-squares boosting, and random forest implemented in MATLAB 2020b. Validation: LOOCV | MSE = 0.05. Pearson correlation coefficient between manual annotation's mean level and prediction models r = .70, p = 0 |
| Youssef et al. [150] | Robot's camera | Distance; head, gaze and face streams; Speech; Laser | Face detection: NAOqi People Perception; Face extraction: OKAO Vision software; Imbalanced issue: undersampling "No breakdown"; oversampling "Breakdown" class using SMOTE. Binary classification: LR, LDA, RF, and MLP. Validation: 5-fold cross validation | AUC ≈ 0.72 |
| Sümer et al. [1] | Camera | Face features, head pose (without facial landmarks) | Face detection: RetinaFace. Multi channel settings: training Attention-Net for head pose estimation and Affect-Net for facial expression recognition CNN. Pre-Process: PCA (for SVM). 3-class classification: SVM (use majority voting), RF, MLP, LSTM with fine-tuning (transfer learning) with AffectNet for facial expression and Attention-Net (300W-LP) for head pose with ResNet-50. Tested using different fusion strategies using RF engagement classifiers. Use of self-supervision and representation learning on unlabelled classroom data | AUC = 0.84 (with personalization). Attention-Net better than AffectNet, given that the criteria for manual annotation of engagement is not directly related to gaze direction or facial expression |
| Trindade et al. [96] | Log file | Teacher and students attributes | WEKA. Random Forest generated the best result | AUC |
| Ma et al. [71] | Use DAiSEE | Eye gaze, facial action unit, head pose (117 dimensions); and body pose (60 dimensions) | Feature extraction: OpenFace 2.0. Pre-process: 640x640 resolution at 10fps. Feature Fusion: Neural Turing Machine (NTM) architecture, which contains two basic components: a neural network controller and a memory bank. NTM workflow: read heads and write heads | Accuracy = 60.2% |
| Thiruthuvanathan et al. [74] | Indian origin faces datasets DAiSEE, ISAF, ISED | 508 images from ISED and ISAF, 5295 images from DAiSEE | Feature extraction: light weight ResNet. Classification: ResNet classifier (CNN with 50 layers deep) | Accuracy, Precision, Recall, Sensitivity, Specificity and F1 score |
| Altuwairqi et al. [60] | Camera, mouse, keyboard behaviour | Key frame facial expressions | Transfer learning using FER2013 and real-world affective faces (RAF). 3-class classification: Naive Bayes (NB) classifier | Accuracy and MSE |
| Vanneste et al. [138] | Camera | Upper body keypoints, eye gaze direction | Feature for individual classification: upper body keypoints (from 25 clips), for collective classifications: eye gaze direction. Classification: i3D model (CNN based) [176]. Multilevel regression: to investigate how the engagement cues relate to the engagement scores. Calculate the CST (collective state transition) to measure classroom engagement | Recall and Precision. Hand-raising and note-taking are not related to students individual self-reported engagement scores |
| Hasnine et al. [97] | Camera | Video | Face detection: Dlib. 3-class classification: training with FER2013, then calculate the concentration index (CI) based on eye gaze and emotion weights. CI = (Emotion Weight × Gaze Weight) / 4.5 | Accuracy = 68% |
| Delgado et al. [204] | Camera | Images | Classification: utilizing CNN family including MobileNet [211], VGG [177], Xception [212] | |
| Engwall et al. [132] | Cameras and microphone | Audio and visual features | Feature extraction: OpenFace 2.0. Feature selection: verbal classifications using bag-of-words representations, acoustic-based classification, video-based classification. Engagement classification through acoustic and visual classification using SVM, DT, Conditional Random Fields, KNN, HMM, Gaussian model, BN, and ANN. Engagement classification through vocal arousal | Listener engagement classification reached 65% balanced accuracy |
| Mehta et al. [73] | Use DAiSEE and EmotiW dataset | Images | Pre-processing: Dlib face detector. 4-class classification and regression: 3D CNN with self-attention module | Classification accuracy = 63.59% on DAiSEE, regression MSE = 0.0347 on DAiSEE and 0.0877 on EmotiW |
| Dubovi et al. [26] | Eye tracker, EDA wearable wristband sensor, webcam | Facial expression, eye-tracking, and EDA data | The stream data was collected and analysed using iMotion 9.0 with 7 basic emotions annotation (joy, anger, surprise, contempt, fear, sadness, and disgust). Emotional engagement: a Linear Mixed Effects Model (LMM) was established to estimate the self-reported changes in the PANAS self-report. Cognitive engagement: ANOVA was performed to assess the eye-tracking metrics differences | |
| Thomas et al. [205] | Use existed datasets [213] | Visual and verbal features | Pre-process: slide area and figure detection using RetinaNet, unique slide detection using Siamese network, text detection using Character-Region Awareness For Text detection (CRAFT) model. Prediction: pretrained with pretrained VGG-16 network. Supervised: LR with three classes (visual, verbal, or balanced). Unsupervised: clustering model with two clusters (visual, verbal). Binary classification: sequential modeling using Temporal Convolutional Network (TCN) pre-trained with Micro-Macro-Motion (MIMAMO) Net model [214] | At the segment level: accuracy = 76%, F1-score = 0.82, MSE = 0.04. At video level (binary classification: engaged/distracted): accuracy = 95%, F1-score = 0.97, MSE = 0.15 |
| Shen et al. [152] | Use JAFFE, CK+, RAF-DB dataset | Images | Pre-process: MK-MMD to calculate the distribution distance between the extracted features. Transfer learning: Domain adaptation technique was used to explore the additional facial images. Imbalanced issue: undersampling, and data augmentation. 4-class classification: lightweight attention convolutional network for face expression recognition. Soft attention module (SE) was adopted to reduce the impact of the complex background | Accuracy = 56% |
| Apicella et al. [62] | EEG | EEG Signal | Pipeline: Filter bank, Common Spatial Pattern, SVM. Pre-process: artifact removal using independent component analysis (ICA), namely Runica module of the EEGLab tool. Feature extraction: 12-component Filter Bank. Imbalanced problem: Stratified leave-2-trials out. Binary classification: SVM, Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA), KNN, shallow ANN, DNN, CNN (pre-trained in Common spatial pattern (CSP)) | SVM achieved the highest score accuracy = 76.9% for cognitive engagement, and 76.7% for emotional engagement |

*Note: PCA = principle component analysis; LDA = linear discriminant analysis; AAM = active appearance model; LOOCV = leave-one-subject-out cross validation; KNN = K-nearest neighbors; BNs = Bayesian Nets; LR = logistic regression; DTs = Decision Trees; NB = Naive Bayes; LBP-TOP = local binary patterns in three orthogonal planes; GBDT = gradient boosting trees; CART = classification and regression tree; CARS = childhood autism rating scale; GRU = gated recurrent unit; LSTM = long-short term memory; CNN = convolutional neural network; RF = random forest; MLP = Multi-layer Perceptron; DT = decision tree; BN = Bayesian Network; HMM = Hidden Markov Models; EDA = electrodermal activity; MK-MMD = Kernel Maximum Mean Discrepancies*

## References

1. Sumer, O., Goldberg, P., D'Mello, S., Gerjets, P., Trautwein, U., & Kasneci, E. (2021). Multimodal engagement analysis from facial videos in the classroom. *IEEE Transactions on Affective Computing*. https://doi.org/10.1109/TAFFC.2021.3127692

2. Lei, H., Cui, Y., & Zhou, W. (2018). Relationships between student engagement and academic achievement: A meta-analysis. *Social Behavior and Personality: An International Journal*, 46(3), 517-528. https://doi.org/10.2224/sbp.7054

3. Ponitz, C. C., Rimm-Kaufman, S. E., Grimm, K. J., & Curby, T. W. (2009). Kindergarten classroom quality, behavioral engagement, and reading achievement. *School Psychology Review*, 38(1), 102-120. https://doi.org/10.1080/02796015.2009.12087852

4. Fredricks, J. A., Blumenfeld, P. C., & Paris, A. H. (2004). School engagement: Potential of the concept, state of the evidence. *Review of Educational Research*, 74(1), 59-109. https://doi.org/10.3102/00346543074001059

5. Alexander, K. L., Entwisle, D. R., & Horsey, C. S. (1997). From first grade forward: Early foundations of high school dropout. *Sociology of Education*, 70(2), 87. https://doi.org/10.2307/2673158

6. Leite, I., McCoy, M., Ullman, D., Salomons, N., & Scassellati, B. (2015). Comparing models of disengagement in individual and group interactions. In *Proceedings of the Tenth Annual ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human-Robot Interaction* (pp. 99-105). ACM. https://doi.org/10.1145/2696454.2696466

7. Yun, S.-S., Choi, M.-T., Kim, M., & Song, J.-B. (2012). Intention reading from a Fuzzy-based human engagement model and behavioural features. *International Journal of Advanced Robotic Systems*. https://doi.org/10.5772/50648

8. Hall, J., Tritton, T., Rowe, A., Pipe, A., Melhuish, C., & Leonards, U. (2014). Perception of own and robot engagement in human-robot interactions and their dependence on robotics knowledge. *Robotics and Autonomous Systems*, 62(3), 392-399. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.robot.2013.09.012

9. Sanghvi, J., Castellano, G., Leite, I., Pereira, A., McOwan, P. W., & Paiva, A. (2011). Automatic analysis of affective postures and body motion to detect engagement with a game companion. In *HRI 2011-Proceedings of the 6th ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human-Robot Interaction* (pp. 305-311). https://doi.org/10.1145/1957656.1957781

10. Rich, C., Ponsler, B., Holroyd, A., & Sidner, C. L. (2010). Recognizing engagement in human-robot interaction. In *2010 5th ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human-Robot Interaction (HRI)* (pp. 375-382). https://doi.org/10.1109/hri.2010.5453163

11. Whitehill, J., Serpell, Z., Lin, Y. C., Foster, A., & Movellan, J. R. (2014). The faces of engagement: Automatic recognition of student engagement from facial expressions. *IEEE Transactions on Affective Computing*, 5(1), 86-98. https://doi.org/10.1109/TAFFC.2014.2316163

12. McDuff, D., Karlson, A., Kapoor, A., Roseway, A., & Czerwinski, M. (2012). AffectAura: An intelligent system for emotional memory. In *Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems* (pp. 849-858). ACM. https://doi.org/10.1145/2207676.2208525

13. Nakano, Y. I., & Ishii, R. (2010). Estimating user's engagement from eye-gaze behaviors in human-agent conversations. In *International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces, Proceedings IUI* (pp. 139-148). https://doi.org/10.1145/1719970.1719990

14. Castellano, G., Pereira, A., Leite, I., Paiva, A., & McOwan, P. W. (2009). Detecting user engagement with a robot companion using task and social interaction-based features. In *Proceedings of the 2009 International Conference on Multimodal Interfaces - ICMI-MLMI '09* (p. 119). ACM Press. https://doi.org/10.1145/1647314.1647336

15. Castellano, G., Leite, I., Pereira, A., Martinho, C., Paiva, A., & McOwan, P. W. (2012). Detecting engagement in HRI: An exploration of social and task-based context. In *2012 International Conference on Privacy, Security, Risk and Trust and 2012 International Conference on Social Computing* (pp. 421-428). https://doi.org/10.1109/SocialCom-PASSAT.2012.51

16. Minsu, J., Dae-Ha, L., Jaehong, K., & Youngjo, C. (2013). Identifying principal social signals in private student-teacher interactions for robot-enhanced education. In *2013 IEEE RO-MAN* (pp. 621-626). https://doi.org/10.1109/ROMAN.2013.6628417

17. Leite, I., McCoy, M., Ullman, D., Salomons, N., & Scassellati, B. (2015). Comparing models of disengagement in individual and group interactions. In *Proceedings of the Tenth Annual ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human-Robot Interaction* (pp. 99-105). ACM. https://doi.org/10.1145/2696454.2696466

18. Dewan, M. A., Murshed, M., & Lin, F. (2019). Engagement detection in online learning: A review. *Smart Learning Environments*, 6(1), 1. https://doi.org/10.1186/s40561-018-0080-z

19. Gudi, A., Tasli, H. E., den Uyl, T. M., & Maroulis, A. (2015). Deep learning based FACS action unit occurrence and intensity estimation. In *2015 11th IEEE International Conference and Workshops on Automatic Face and Gesture Recognition (FG)* (Vol. 2015-January, pp. 1-5). https://doi.org/10.1109/FG.2015.7284873

20. Chaouachi, M., Chalfoun, P., Jraidi, I., & Frasson, C. (2010). Affect and mental engagement: Towards adaptability for intelligent systems. In *Proceedings of the 23rd International Florida Artificial Intelligence Research Society Conference, FLAIRS-23* (pp. 355-360).

21. Abdellaoui, B., Moumen, A., El Bouzekri El Idrissi, Y., & Remaida, A. (2020). Face detection to recognize students' emotion and their engagement: A systematic review. In *2020 IEEE 2nd International Conference on Electronics, Control, Optimization and Computer Science (ICECOCS)* (pp. 1-6). https://doi.org/10.1109/ICECOCS50124.2020.9314600

22. Chatterjee, I., Goršič, M., Clapp, J. D., & Novak, D. (2021). Automatic estimation of interpersonal engagement during naturalistic conversation using dyadic physiological measurements. *Frontiers in Neuroscience*. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnins.2021.757381

23. Rudovic, O., Lee, J., Dai, M., Schuller, B., & Picard, R. W. (2018). Personalized machine learning for robot perception of affect and engagement in autism therapy. *Science Robotics*. https://doi.org/10.1126/scirobotics.aao6760

24. Yun, W. H., Lee, D., Park, C., Kim, J., & Kim, J. (2020). Automatic recognition of children engagement from facial video using convolutional neural networks. *IEEE Transactions on Affective Computing*, 11(4), 696-707. https://doi.org/10.1109/TAFFC.2018.2834350

25. Yue, J., Tian, F., Chao, K.-M., Shah, N., Li, L., Chen, Y., & Zheng, Q. (2019). Recognizing multidimensional engagement of e-learners based on multi-channel data in e-learning environment. *IEEE Access*, 7, 149554-149567. https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2947091

26. Dubovi, I. (2022). Cognitive and emotional engagement while learning with VR: The perspective of multimodal methodology. *Computers & Education*, 183, 104495. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2022.104495

27. Psaltis, A., Apostolakis, K. C., Dimitropoulos, K., & Daras, P. (2018). Multimodal student engagement recognition in prosocial games. *IEEE Transactions on Games*, 10(3), 292-303. https://doi.org/10.1109/TCIAIG.2017.2743341

28. Monkaresi, H., Bosch, N., Calvo, R. A., & D'Mello, S. K. (2017). Automated detection of engagement using video-based estimation of facial expressions and heart rate. *IEEE Transactions on Affective Computing*, 8(1), 15-28. https://doi.org/10.1109/TAFFC.2016.2515084

29. AlZoubi, O., D'Mello, S. K., & Calvo, R. A. (2012). Detecting naturalistic expressions of nonbasic affect using physiological signals. *IEEE Transactions on Affective Computing*, 3(3), 298-310. https://doi.org/10.1109/T-AFFC.2012.4

30. Zaletelj, J., & Košir, A. (2017). Predicting students' attention in the classroom from Kinect facial and body features. *EURASIP Journal on Image and Video Processing*, 2017(1), 80. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13640-017-0228-8

31. Ashwin, T. S., & Guddeti, R. M. R. (2020). Automatic detection of students' affective states in classroom environment using hybrid convolutional neural networks. *Education and Information Technologies*, 25(2), 1387-1415. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10639-019-10004-6

32. Ben-Youssef, A., Varni, G., Essid, S., & Clavel, C. (2019). On-the-fly detection of user engagement decrease in spontaneous human-robot interaction using recurrent and deep neural networks. *International Journal of Social Robotics*, 11(5), 815-828. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12369-019-00591-2

33. D'Mello, S., Dieterle, E., & Duckworth, A. (2017). Advanced, analytic, automated (AAA) measurement of engagement during learning. *Educational Psychologist*, 52(2), 104-123. https://doi.org/10.1080/00461520.2017.1281747

34. Alarcão, S. M., & Fonseca, M. J. (2019). Emotions recognition using EEG signals: A survey. *IEEE Transactions on Affective Computing*, 10(3), 374-393. https://doi.org/10.1109/TAFFC.2017.2714671

35. Page, M. J., McKenzie, J. E., Bossuyt, P. M., Boutron, I., Hoffmann, T. C., Mulrow, C. D., et al. (2021). The PRISMA 2020 statement: An updated guideline for reporting systematic reviews. *Systematic Reviews*, 10(1), 89. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13643-021-01626-4

36. Christenson, S., Reschly, A. L., & Wylie, C. (Eds.). (2012). *Handbook of Research on Student Engagement*. Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4614-2018-7

37. Keen, D. (2009). Engagement of children with autism in learning. *Australasian Journal of Special Education*, 33(2), 130-140. https://doi.org/10.1375/ajse.33.2.130

38. Sharkawy, A.-N. (2021). A survey on applications of human-robot interaction. *Sensors & Transducers Journal*, 251(4), 19-27.

39. Celiktutan, O., Skordos, E., & Gunes, H. (2019). Multimodal human-human-robot interactions (MHHRI) dataset for studying personality and engagement. *IEEE Transactions on Affective Computing*, 10(4), 484-497. https://doi.org/10.1109/TAFFC.2017.2737019

40. Del Duchetto, F., Baxter, P., & Hanheide, M. (2020). Are you still with me? Continuous engagement assessment from a robot's point of view. *Frontiers in Robotics and AI*. https://doi.org/10.3389/frobt.2020.00116

41. Peters, C., Pelachaud, C., Bevacqua, E., Mancini, M., & Poggi, I. (2005). A model of attention and interest using gaze behavior. In *International Workshop on Intelligent Virtual Agents* (pp. 229-240). Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/11550617_20

42. D'Mello, S., Picard, R. W., & Graesser, A. (2007). Toward an affect-sensitive AutoTutor. *IEEE Intelligent Systems*, 22(4), 53-61. https://doi.org/10.1109/MIS.2007.79

43. Wolters, C. A., & Taylor, D. J. (2012). A self-regulated learning perspective on student engagement. In *Handbook of Research on Student Engagement* (pp. 635-651). Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4614-2018-7_30

44. Finn, J. D., & Zimmer, K. S. (2012). Student engagement: What is it? Why does it matter? In *Handbook of Research on Student Engagement* (pp. 97-131). Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4614-2018-7_5

45. Greene, B. A. (2015). Measuring cognitive engagement with self-report scales: Reflections from over 20 years of research. *Educational Psychologist*, 50(1), 14-30. https://doi.org/10.1080/00461520.2014.989230

46. Xie, K., Heddy, B. C., & Greene, B. A. (2019). Affordances of using mobile technology to support experience-sampling method in examining college students' engagement. *Computers & Education*, 128, 183-198. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2018.09.020

47. Azevedo, R. (2015). Defining and measuring engagement and learning in science: Conceptual, theoretical, methodological, and analytical issues. *Educational Psychologist*, 50(1), 84-94. https://doi.org/10.1080/00461520.2015.1004069

48. Ekman, P., & Friesen, W. V. (1978). *Facial Action Coding System*. Consulting Psychologists Press.

49. Cerezo, R., Sánchez-Santillán, M., Paule-Ruiz, M. P., & Núñez, J. C. (2016). Students' LMS interaction patterns and their relationship with achievement: A case study in higher education. *Computers & Education*, 96, 42-54. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.COMPEDU.2016.02.006

50. Okubo, F., Yamashita, T., Shimada, A., & Ogata, H. (2017). A neural network approach for students' performance prediction. In *Proceedings of the Seventh International Learning Analytics & Knowledge Conference* (pp. 598-599). ACM. https://doi.org/10.1145/3027385.3029479

51. You, J. W. (2016). Identifying significant indicators using LMS data to predict course achievement in online learning. *The Internet and Higher Education*, 29, 23-30. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.IHEDUC.2015.11.003

52. Bosch, N., D'mello, S. K., Ocumpaugh, J., Baker, R. S., & Shute, V. (2016). Using video to automatically detect learner affect in computer-enabled classrooms. *ACM Transactions on Interactive Intelligent Systems*, 6(2), 1-26. https://doi.org/10.1145/2946837

53. Bosch, N. (2016). Detecting student engagement: Human versus machine. In *UMAP 2016: Proceedings of the 2016 Conference on User Modeling Adaptation and Personalization* (pp. 317-320). https://doi.org/10.1145/2930238.2930371

54. Di Lascio, E., Gashi, S., & Santini, S. (2018). Unobtrusive assessment of students' emotional engagement during lectures using electrodermal activity sensors. *Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies*, 2(3), 1-21. https://doi.org/10.1145/3264913

55. McNeal, K. S., Zhong, M., Soltis, N. A., Doukopoulos, L., Johnson, E. T., Courtney, S., et al. (2020). Biosensors show promise as a measure of student engagement in a large introductory biology course. *CBE-Life Sciences Education*, 19(4), 50. https://doi.org/10.1187/cbe.19-08-0158

56. Poulsen, A. T., Kamronn, S., Dmochowski, J., Parra, L. C., & Hansen, L. K. (2017). EEG in the classroom: Synchronised neural recordings during video presentation. *Scientific Reports*, 7(1), 43916. https://doi.org/10.1038/srep43916

57. Bevilacqua, D., Davidesco, I., Wan, L., Chaloner, K., Rowland, J., Ding, M., et al. (2019). Brain-to-brain synchrony and learning outcomes vary by student–teacher dynamics: Evidence from a real-world classroom electroencephalography study. *Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience*, 31(3), 401-411. https://doi.org/10.1162/jocn_a_01274

58. Darnell, D. K., & Krieg, P. A. (2019). Student engagement, assessed using heart rate, shows no reset following active learning sessions in lectures. *PLoS ONE*, 14(12), 0225709. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0225709

59. Russell, J. A. (1980). A circumplex model of affect. *Journal of Personality and Social Psychology*, 39(6), 1161-1178. https://doi.org/10.1037/h0077714

60. Altuwairqi, K., Jarraya, S. K., Allinjawi, A., & Hammami, M. (2021). Student behavior analysis to measure engagement levels in online learning environments. *Signal, Image and Video Processing*, 15(7), 1387-1395. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11760-021-01869-7

61. Carlotta Olivetti, E., Violante, M. G., Vezzetti, E., Marcolin, F., & Eynard, B. (2019). Engagement evaluation in a virtual learning environment via facial expression recognition and self-reports: A preliminary approach. *Applied Sciences*, 10(1), 314. https://doi.org/10.3390/app10010314

62. Apicella, A., Arpaia, P., Frosolone, M., Improta, G., Moccaldi, N., & Pollastro, A. (2022). EEG-based measurement system for monitoring student engagement in learning 4.0. *Scientific Reports*, 12(1), 5857. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-022-09578-y

63. Goldberg, P., Sümer, M., Stürmer, K., Wagner, W., Göllner, R., Gerjets, P., et al. (2021). Attentive or not? Toward a machine learning approach to assessing students' visible engagement in classroom instruction. *Educational Psychology Review*, 33(1), 27-49. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10648-019-09514-z

64. Wang, S., Liu, Z., Lv, S., Lv, Y., Wu, G., Peng, P., et al. (2010). A natural visible and infrared facial expression database for expression recognition and emotion inference. *IEEE Transactions on Multimedia*, 12(7), 682-691. https://doi.org/10.1109/TMM.2010.2060716

65. Zhalehpour, S., Onder, O., Akhtar, Z., & Erdem, C. E. (2017). BAUM-1: A spontaneous audio-visual face database of affective and mental states. *IEEE Transactions on Affective Computing*, 8(3), 300-313. https://doi.org/10.1109/TAFFC.2016.2553038

66. Psaltis, A., Kaza, K., Stefanidis, K., Thermos, S., Apostolakis, K. C., Dimitropoulos, K., & Daras, P. (2016). Multimodal affective state recognition in serious games applications. In *IST 2016-2016 IEEE International Conference on Imaging Systems and Techniques, Proceedings* (pp. 435-439). https://doi.org/10.1109/IST.2016.7738265

67. Mollahosseini, A., Hasani, B., & Mahoor, M. H. (2019). AffectNet: A database for facial expression, valence, and arousal computing in the wild. *IEEE Transactions on Affective Computing*, 10(1), 18-31. https://doi.org/10.1109/TAFFC.2017.2740923

68. Gupta, A., D'Cunha, A., Awasthi, K., & Balasubramanian, V. (2016). DAiSEE: Towards user engagement recognition in the wild. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1609.01885

69. Ben-Youssef, A., Clavel, C., Essid, S., Bilac, M., Chamoux, M., & Lim, A. (2017). UE-HRI: A new dataset for the study of user engagement in spontaneous human-robot interactions. In *Proceedings of the 19th ACM International Conference on Multimodal Interaction* (pp. 464-472). ACM. https://doi.org/10.1145/3136755.3136814

70. Pabba, C., & Kumar, P. (2022). An intelligent system for monitoring students' engagement in large classroom teaching through facial expression recognition. *Expert Systems*. https://doi.org/10.1111/exsy.12839

71. Ma, X., Xu, M., Dong, Y., & Sun, Z. (2021). Automatic student engagement in online learning environment based on neural turing machine. *International Journal of Information and Education Technology*, 11(3), 107-111. https://doi.org/10.18178/ijiet.2021.11.3.1497

72. Liao, J., Liang, Y., & Pan, J. (2021). Deep facial spatiotemporal network for engagement prediction in online learning. *Applied Intelligence*, 51(10), 6609-6621. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10489-020-02139-8

73. Mehta, N. K., Prasad, S. S., Saurav, S., Saini, R., & Singh, S. (2022). Three-dimensional DenseNet self-attention neural network for automatic detection of student's engagement. *Applied Intelligence*. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10489-022-03200-4

74. Thiruthuvanathan, M., Krishnan, B., & Rangaswamy, M. A. D. (2021). Engagement detection through facial emotional recognition using a shallow residual convolutional neural networks. *International Journal of Intelligent Engineering and Systems*, 14, 236-247.

75. Dhall, A., Kaur, A., Goecke, R., & Gedeon, T. (2018). EmotiW 2018: Audio-video, student engagement and group-level affect prediction. In *Proceedings of the 2018 on International Conference on Multimodal Interaction-ICMI '18* (pp. 653-656). ACM Press. https://doi.org/10.1145/3242969.3264993

76. Dhall, A., Sharma, G., Goecke, R., & Gedeon, T. (2020). EmotiW 2020: Driver gaze, group emotion, student engagement and physiological signal based challenges. In *Proceedings of the 2020 International Conference on Multimodal Interaction* (pp. 784-789). ACM. https://doi.org/10.1145/3382507.3417973

77. ACM International Conference on Multimodal Interaction 2020: Eighth Emotion Recognition in the Wild Challenge (EmotiW). (2020). https://sites.google.com/view/emotiw2020/challenge-details

78. Goodfellow, I. J., Erhan, D., Luc Carrier, P., Courville, A., Mirza, M., Hamner, B., et al. (2013). Challenges in representation learning: A report on three machine learning contests. *Neural Networks*, 64, 59-63. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neunet.2014.09.005

79. Parkhi, O. M., Vedaldi, A., & Zisserman, A. (2015). Deep face recognition. In *Proceedings of the British Machine Vision Conference 2015* (pp. 1-12). https://doi.org/10.5244/C.29.41

80. Cao, Q., Shen, L., Xie, W., Parkhi, O. M., & Zisserman, A. (2018). VGGFace2: A dataset for recognising faces across pose and age. In *2018 13th IEEE International Conference on Automatic Face & Gesture Recognition (FG 2018)* (pp. 67-74). https://doi.org/10.1109/FG.2018.00020

81. Schroff, F., Kalenichenko, D., & Philbin, J. (2015). FaceNet: A unified embedding for face recognition and clustering. In *2015 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR)* (pp. 815-823). https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.2015.7298682

82. Zhu, X., Lei, Z., Liu, X., Shi, H., & Li, S. Z. (2016). Face alignment across large poses: A 3D solution. In *2016 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR)* (Vol. 2016-December, pp. 146-155). https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.2016.23

83. Lyons, M., Akamatsu, S., Kamachi, M., & Gyoba, J. (2002). Coding facial expressions with Gabor wavelets. In *Proceedings Third IEEE International Conference on Automatic Face and Gesture Recognition* (pp. 200-205). IEEE Internet Computing. https://doi.org/10.1109/AFGR.1998.670949

84. Lucey, P., Cohn, J. F., Prkachin, K. M., Solomon, P. E., & Matthews, I. (2011). Painful data: The UNBC-McMaster shoulder pain expression archive database. In *Face and Gesture 2011* (pp. 57-64). IEEE. https://doi.org/10.1109/FG.2011.5771462

85. Li, S., Deng, W., & Du, J. (2017). Reliable crowdsourcing and deep locality-preserving learning for expression recognition in the wild. In *2017 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR)* (pp. 2584-2593). https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.2017.277

86. Fredricks, J. A., & McColskey, W. (2012). The measurement of student engagement: A comparative analysis of various methods and student self-report instruments. In *Handbook of Research on Student Engagement* (pp. 763-782). Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4614-2018-7_37

87. O'Brien, H. L., & Toms, E. G. (2010). The development and evaluation of a survey to measure user engagement. *Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology*, 61(1), 50-69. https://doi.org/10.1002/asi.21229

88. Kruger, J., & Dunning, D. (1999). Unskilled and unaware of it: How difficulties in recognizing one's own incompetence lead to inflated self-assessments. *Journal of Personality and Social Psychology*, 77(6), 1121-1134. https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.77.6.1121

89. Pennycook, G., Ross, R. M., Koehler, D. J., & Fugelsang, J. A. (2017). Dunning–Kruger effects in reasoning: Theoretical implications of the failure to recognize incompetence. *Psychonomic Bulletin & Review*, 24(6), 1774-1784. https://doi.org/10.3758/s13423-017-1242-7

90. Eisele, G., Vachon, H., Lafit, G., Kuppens, P., Houben, M., Myin-Germeys, I., & Viechtbauer, W. (2022). The effects of sampling frequency and questionnaire length on perceived burden, compliance, and careless responding in experience sampling data in a student population. *Assessment*, 29(2), 136-151. https://doi.org/10.1177/1073191120957102

91. Ramanarayanan, V., Leong, C. W., & Suendermann-Oeft, D. (2017). Rushing to judgement: How do laypeople rate caller engagement in thin-slice videos of human-machine dialog? In *Interspeech 2017* (pp. 2526-2530). ISCA. https://doi.org/10.21437/Interspeech.2017-1205

92. Ramanarayanan, V., Leong, C. W., Suendermann-Oeft, D., & Evanini, K. (2017). Crowdsourcing ratings of caller engagement in thin-slice videos of human-machine dialog: Benefits and pitfalls. In *Proceedings of the 19th ACM International Conference on Multimodal Interaction* (pp. 281-287). ACM. https://doi.org/10.1145/3136755.3136767

93. Peterson, P. L., Swing, S. R., Stark, K. D., & Waas, G. A. (1984). Students' cognitions and time on task during mathematics instruction. *American Educational Research Journal*, 21(3), 487-515. https://doi.org/10.2307/1162912

94. Schober, M. F., & Clark, H. H. (1989). Understanding by addressees and overhearers. *Cognitive Psychology*, 21(2), 211-232. https://doi.org/10.1016/0010-0285(89)90008-X

95. Winne, P. H., & Perry, N. E. (2000). Measuring self-regulated learning. In *Handbook of Self-Regulation* (pp. 531-566). https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-012109890-2/50045-7

96. Ribeiro Trindade, F., & James Ferreira, D. (2021). Student performance prediction based on a framework of teacher's features. *International Journal for Innovation Education and Research*, 9(2), 178-196. https://doi.org/10.31686/ijier.vol9.iss2.2935

97. Hasnine, M. N., Bui, H. T. T., Tran, T. T. T., Nguyen, H. T., Akçaponar, G., & Ueda, H. (2021). Students' emotion extraction and visualization for engagement detection in online learning. *Procedia Computer Science*, 192, 3423-3431. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.PROC.2021.09.115

98. Chi, M. T. H., & Wylie, R. (2014). The ICAP framework: Linking cognitive engagement to active learning outcomes. *Educational Psychologist*, 49(4), 219-243. https://doi.org/10.1080/00461520.2014.965823

99. Girard, J. M. (2014). CARMA: Software for continuous affect rating and media annotation. *Journal of Open Research Software*. https://doi.org/10.5334/jors.ar

100. Kipp, M. (2008). Spatiotemporal coding in ANVIL. In *Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC'08)*. European Language Resources Association (ELRA). http://www.lrec-conf.org/proceedings/lrec2008/pdf/521_paper.pdf

101. Baur, T., Mehlmann, G., Damian, I., Lingenfelser, F., Wagner, J., Lugrin, B., et al. (2015). Context-aware automated analysis and annotation of human–agent interactions. *ACM Transactions on Interactive Intelligent Systems*, 5(2), 1-33. https://doi.org/10.1145/2764921

102. Wittenburg, P., Brugman, H., Russel, A., Klassmann, A., & Sloetjes, H. (2006). ELAN: A professional framework for multimodality research. In *LREC*.

103. Brugman, H., & Russel, A. (2004). Annotating multi-media/multi-modal resources with ELAN. In *Proceedings of the Fourth International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC'04)*. European Language Resources Association (ELRA). http://www.lrec-conf.org/proceedings/lrec2004/pdf/480.pdf

104. Ashwin, T. S., & Guddeti, R. M. R. (2020). Affective database for e-learning and classroom environments using Indian students' faces, hand gestures and body postures. *Future Generation Computer Systems*, 108, 334-348. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.future.2020.02.075

105. Ashwin, T. S., & Guddeti, R. M. R. (2020). Automatic detection of students' affective states in classroom environment using hybrid convolutional neural networks. *Education and Information Technologies*, 25(2), 1387-1415. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10639-019-10004-6

106. Zhang, Z., Li, Z., Liu, H., Cao, T., & Liu, S. (2020). Data-driven online learning engagement detection via facial expression and mouse behavior recognition technology. *Journal of Educational Computing Research*, 58(1), 63-86. https://doi.org/10.1177/0735633119825575

107. Zhu, B., Lan, X., Guo, X., Barner, K. E., & Boncelet, C. (2020). Multi-rate attention based gru model for engagement prediction. In *Proceedings of the 2020 International Conference on Multimodal Interaction* (pp. 841-848). ACM. https://doi.org/10.1145/3382507.3417965

108. Vaswani, A., Shazeer, N., Parmar, N., Uszkoreit, J., Jones, L., Gomez, A. N., Kaiser, L., & Polosukhin, I. (2017). Attention is all you need. In *Proceedings of the 31st International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems. NIPS'17* (pp. 6000-6010). Curran Associates Inc.

109. Winata, G. I., Kampman, O. P., & Fung, P. (2018). Attention-based LSTM for psychological stress detection from spoken language using distant supervision. In *2018 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP)* (pp. 6204-6208). https://doi.org/10.1109/ICASSP.2018.8461990

110. Lufi, D., & Haimov, I. (2019). Effects of age on attention level: Changes in performance between the ages of 12 and 90. *Aging, Neuropsychology, and Cognition*, 26(6), 904-919. https://doi.org/10.1080/13825585.2018.1546820

111. Goodfellow, I., Bengio, Y., & Courville, A. (2016). *Deep Learning*. MIT Press.

112. Schuller, B. (2015). Deep learning our everyday emotions. In *Advances in neural networks: Computational and theoretical issues* (pp. 339-346). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-18164-6_33

113. Kratzwald, B., Ilić, S., Kraus, M., Feuerriegel, S., & Prendinger, H. (2018). Deep learning for affective computing: Text-based emotion recognition in decision support. *Decision Support Systems*, 115, 24-35. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.DSS.2018.09.002

114. Zhao, S., Wang, S., Soleymani, M., Joshi, D., & Ji, Q. (2019). Affective computing for large-scale heterogeneous multimedia data. *ACM Transactions on Multimedia Computing, Communications, and Applications*, 15(3s), 1-32. https://doi.org/10.1145/3363560

115. Rouast, P. V., Adam, M. T. P., & Chiong, R. (2021). Deep learning for human affect recognition: Insights and new developments. *IEEE Transactions on Affective Computing*, 12(2), 524-543. https://doi.org/10.1109/TAFFC.2018.2890471

116. Chen, X., Xie, H., Zou, D., & Hwang, G. J. (2020). Application and theory gaps during the rise of artificial intelligence in education. *Computers and Education: Artificial Intelligence*, 1, 100002. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.CAEAI.2020.100002

117. Ouyang, F., & Jiao, P. (2021). Artificial intelligence in education: The three paradigms. *Computers and Education: Artificial Intelligence*, 2, 100020. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.CAEAI.2021.100020

118. Hernandez, J., Liu, Z., Hulten, G., DeBarr, D., Krum, K., & Zhang, Z. (2013). Measuring the engagement level of TV viewers. In *2013 10th IEEE International Conference and Workshops on Automatic Face and Gesture Recognition (FG)* (pp. 1-7). https://doi.org/10.1109/FG.2013.6553742

119. Li, S., & Deng, W. (2020). Deep facial expression recognition: A survey. *IEEE Transactions on Affective Computing*, 3045(c), 1-1. https://doi.org/10.1109/TAFFC.2020.2981446

120. Akker, R., Hofs, D., Hondorp, H., Akker, H., Zwiers, J., & Nijholt, A. (2009). Supporting engagement and floor control in hybrid meetings (pp. 276-290). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-03320-9_26

121. Ba, S. O., & Odobez, J.-M. (2006). Head pose tracking and focus of attention recognition algorithms in meeting rooms. In *Multimodal Technologies for Perception of Humans* (pp. 345-357). Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-69568-4_32

122. Dong, L., Di, H., Tao, L., Xu, G., & Oliver, P. (2010). Visual focus of attention recognition in the ambient kitchen. In *Asian Conference on Computer Vision* (pp. 548-559). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-12297-2_53

123. Voit, M., & Stiefelhagen, R. (2008). Deducing the visual focus of attention from head pose estimation in dynamic multi-view meeting scenarios. In *Proceedings of the 10th International Conference on Multimodal Interfaces - IMCI '08* (p. 173). ACM Press. https://doi.org/10.1145/1452392.1452425

124. Zhang, Z., Hu, Y., Liu, M., & Huang, T. (2007). Head pose estimation in seminar room using multi view face detectors (pp. 299-304). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-69568-4_27

125. Baltrusaitis, T., Robinson, P., & Morency, L.-P. (2016). OpenFace: An open source facial behavior analysis toolkit. In *2016 IEEE Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision (WACV)* (pp. 1-10). https://doi.org/10.1109/WACV.2016.7477553

126. Baltrusaitis, T., Zadeh, A., Lim, Y. C., & Morency, L.-P. (2018). OpenFace 2.0: Facial behavior analysis toolkit. In *2018 13th IEEE International Conference on Automatic Face & Gesture Recognition (FG 2018)* (pp. 59-66). https://doi.org/10.1109/FG.2018.00019

127. Kaur, A., Mustafa, A., Mehta, L., & Dhall, A. (2018). Prediction and localization of student engagement in the wild. In *2018 Digital Image Computing: Techniques and Applications (DICTA)* (pp. 1-8). IEEE. https://doi.org/10.1109/DICTA.2018.8615851

128. Wu, J., Yang, B., Wang, Y., & Hattori, G. (2020). Advanced multi-instance learning method with multi-features engineering and conservative optimization for engagement intensity prediction. In *Proceedings of the 2020 International Conference on Multimodal Interaction* (pp. 777-783). ACM. https://doi.org/10.1145/3382507.3417959

129. Zhang, H., Xiao, X., Huang, T., Liu, S., Xia, Y., & Li, J. (2019). An novel end-to-end network for automatic student engagement recognition. In *2019 IEEE 9th International Conference on Electronics Information and Emergency Communication (ICEIEC)* (pp. 342-345). https://doi.org/10.1109/ICEIEC.2019.8784507

130. Thong Huynh, V., Kim, S.-H., Lee, G.-S., & Yang, H.-J. (2019). Engagement intensity prediction with facial behavior features. In *2019 International Conference on Multimodal Interaction* (pp. 567-571). ACM. https://doi.org/10.1145/3340555.3355714

131. Li, S., Lajoie, S. P., Zheng, J., Wu, H., & Cheng, H. (2021). Automated detection of cognitive engagement to inform the art of staying engaged in problem-solving. *Computers & Education*, 163, 104114. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.COMPEDU.2020.104114

132. Engwall, O., Cumbal, R., Lopes, J., Ljung, M., & Månsson, L. (2022). Identification of low-engaged learners in robot-led second language conversations with adults. *ACM Transactions on Human-Robot Interaction*, 11(2), 1-33. https://doi.org/10.1145/3503799

133. Yang, D., Alsadoon, A., Prasad, P. W. C., Singh, A. K., & Elchouemi, A. (2018). An emotion recognition model based on facial recognition in virtual learning environment. In *Procedia Computer Science* (Vol. 125, pp. 2-10). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procs.2017.12.003

134. Wang, Y., Kotha, A., Hong, P. H., & Qiu, M. (2020). Automated student engagement monitoring and evaluation during learning in the wild. In *Proceedings-2020 7th IEEE International Conference on Cyber Security and Cloud Computing and 2020 6th IEEE International Conference on Edge Computing and Scalable Cloud, CSCloud-EdgeCom 2020* (pp. 270-275). https://doi.org/10.1109/CSCloud-EdgeCom49738.2020.00054

135. De Carolis, B., D'Errico, F., Macchiarulo, N., & Palestra, G. (2019). "Engaged faces": Measuring and monitoring student engagement from face and gaze behavior. In *Proceedings–2019 IEEE/WIC/ACM International Conference on Web Intelligence Workshops, WI 2019 Companion* (pp. 80-85). https://doi.org/10.1145/3358695.3361748

136. Bhardwaj, P., Gupta, P. K., Panwar, H., Siddiqui, M. K., Morales-Menendez, R., & Bhaik, A. (2021). Application of deep learning on student engagement in e-learning environments. *Computers and Electrical Engineering*. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compeleceng.2021.107277

137. Cao, Z., Simon, T., Wei, S.-E., & Sheikh, Y. (2017). Realtime multi-person 2D pose estimation using part affinity fields. In *2017 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR)* (Vol. 2017-January, pp. 1302-1310). https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.2017.143

138. Vanneste, P., Oramas, J., Verelst, T., Tuytelaars, T., Raes, A., Depaepe, F., & Noortgate, W. V. D. (2021). Computer vision and human behaviour, emotion and cognition detection: A use case on student engagement. *Mathematics*, 9(3), 1-20. https://doi.org/10.3390/math9030287

139. Zheng, X., Hasegawa, S., Tran, M.-T., Ota, K., & Unoki, T. (2021). Estimation of learners' engagement using face and body features by transfer learning (pp. 541-552). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-77772-2_36

140. Deng, J., Guo, J., Zhou, Y., Yu, J., Kotsia, I., & Zafeiriou, S. (2019). RetinaFace: Single-stage dense face localisation in the wild. *arXiv* abs/1905.00641.

141. Ren, S., He, K., Girshick, R., & Sun, J. (2015). Faster R-CNN: Towards real-time object detection with region proposal networks. In *Proceedings of the 28th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems-Volume 1. NIPS'15* (pp. 91-99). MIT Press.

142. Rudovic, O., Utsumi, Y., Lee, J., Hernandez, J., Ferrer, E. C., Schuller, B., & Picard, R. W. (2018). CultureNet: A deep learning approach for engagement intensity estimation from face images of children with autism. In *IEEE International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems* (pp. 339-346). https://doi.org/10.1109/IROS.2018.8594177

143. Zhang, K., Zhang, Z., Li, Z., & Qiao, Y. (2016). Joint face detection and alignment using multitask cascaded convolutional networks. *IEEE Signal Processing Letters*, 23(10), 1499-1503. https://doi.org/10.1109/LSP.2016.2603342

144. Baltrusaitis, T., Robinson, P., & Morency, L.-P. (2013). Constrained local neural fields for robust facial landmark detection in the wild. In *2013 IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision Workshops* (pp. 354-361). https://doi.org/10.1109/ICCVW.2013.54

145. Zadeh, A., Lim, Y. C., Baltrusaitis, T., & Morency, L.-P. (2017). Convolutional experts constrained local model for 3D facial landmark detection. In *2017 IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision Workshops (ICCVW)* (Vol. 2018-January, pp. 2519-2528). https://doi.org/10.1109/ICCVW.2017.296

146. Wood, E., Baltruaitis, T., Zhang, X., Sugano, Y., Robinson, P., & Bulling, A. (2015). Rendering of eyes for eye-shape registration and gaze estimation. In *2015 IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV)* (Vol. 2015 Inter, pp. 3756-3764). https://doi.org/10.1109/ICCV.2015.428

147. Viola, P., & Jones, M. (2001). Rapid object detection using a boosted cascade of simple features. In *Proceedings of the 2001 IEEE Computer Society Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. CVPR 2001* (Vol. 1, pp. 511-518). https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.2001.990517

148. Viola, P., & Jones, M. J. (2004). Robust real-time face detection. *International Journal of Computer Vision*, 57(2), 137-154. https://doi.org/10.1023/B:VISI.0000013087.49260.fb

149. Schmidt, A., & Kasiński, A. (2007). The performance of the Haar cascade classifiers applied to the face and eyes detection (pp. 816-823). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-75175-5_101

150. Ben-Youssef, A., Clavel, C., & Essid, S. (2021). Early detection of user engagement breakdown in spontaneous human-humanoid interaction. *IEEE Transactions on Affective Computing*, 12(3), 776-787. https://doi.org/10.1109/TAFFC.2019.2898399

151. Wang, M., & Deng, W. (2021). Deep face recognition: A survey. *Neurocomputing*, 429, 215-244. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.NEUCOM.2020.10.081

152. Shen, J., Yang, H., Li, J., & Cheng, Z. (2022). Assessing learning engagement based on facial expression recognition in MOOC's scenario. *Multimedia Systems*, 28(2), 469-478. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00530-021-00854-x

153. Chen, Y.-W., & Lin, C.-J. (2006). Combining SVMs with various feature selection strategies. In *Feature Extraction. Studies in Fuzziness and Soft Computing* (Vol. 207, pp. 315-324). Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-35488-8_13

154. Schiavo, G., Cappelletti, A., & Zancanaro, M. (2014). Engagement recognition using easily detectable behavioral cues. *Intelligenza Artificiale*, 8(2), 197-210. https://doi.org/10.3233/IA-140073

155. Galar, M., Fernandez, A., Barrenechea, E., Bustince, H., & Herrera, F. (2012). A review on ensembles for the class imbalance problem: Bagging-, boosting-, and hybrid-based approaches. *IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, Part C (Applications and Reviews)*, 42(4), 463-484. https://doi.org/10.1109/TSMCC.2011.2161285

156. García, V., Sánchez, J. S., & Mollineda, R. A. (2012). On the effectiveness of preprocessing methods when dealing with different levels of class imbalance. *Knowledge-Based Systems*, 25(1), 13-21. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.KNOSYS.2011.06.013

157. Chawla, N. V., Bowyer, K. W., Hall, L. O., & Kegelmeyer, W. P. (2002). SMOTE: Synthetic minority over-sampling technique. *Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research*, 16, 321-357. https://doi.org/10.1613/jair.953

158. Dresvyanskiy, D., Minker, W., & Karpov, A. (2021). Deep learning based engagement recognition in highly imbalanced data. In *Speech and Computer* (pp. 166-178). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-87802-3_16

159. Rudovic, O., Zhang, M., Schuller, B., & Picard, R. (2019). Multi-modal active learning from human data: A deep reinforcement learning approach. In *2019 International Conference on Multimodal Interaction* (pp. 6-15). ACM. https://doi.org/10.1145/3340555.3353742

160. Rudovic, O., Park, H. W., Busche, J., Schuller, B., Breazeal, C., & Picard, R. W. (2019). Personalized estimation of engagement from videos using active learning with deep reinforcement learning. In *2019 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Workshops (CVPRW)* (pp. 217-226). https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPRW.2019.00031

161. Lin, T.-Y., Goyal, P., Girshick, R., He, K., & Dollar, P. (2017). Focal loss for dense object detection. In *2017 IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV)* (pp. 2999-3007). https://doi.org/10.1109/ICCV.2017.324

162. Witten, I., & Frank, E. (2005). *Data Mining: Practical Machine Learning Tools and Techniques* (2nd ed.). Morgan Kaufmann.

163. Cocea, M., & Weibelzahl, S. (2011). Disengagement detection in online learning: Validation studies and perspectives. *IEEE Transactions on Learning Technologies*, 4(2), 114-124. https://doi.org/10.1109/TLT.2010.14

164. Littlewort, G., Whitehill, J., Wu, T., Fasel, I., Frank, M., Movellan, J., & Bartlett, M. (2011). The computer expression recognition toolbox (CERT). In *Face and Gesture 2011* (pp. 298-305). IEEE. https://doi.org/10.1109/FG.2011.5771414

165. Fuad, M. T. H., Fime, A. A., Sikder, D., Iftee, M. A. R., Rabbi, J., Al-Rakhami, M. S., et al. (2021). Recent advances in deep learning techniques for face recognition. *IEEE Access*, 9, 99112-99142. https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2021.3096136

166. He, K., Zhang, X., Ren, S., & Sun, J. (2016). Deep residual learning for image recognition. In *2016 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR)* (pp. 770-778). https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.2016.90

167. Noh, H., Hong, S., & Han, B. (2015). Learning deconvolution network for semantic segmentation. In *2015 IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV)* (pp. 1520-1528). https://doi.org/10.1109/ICCV.2015.178

168. Szegedy, C., Liu, W., Jia, Y., Sermanet, P., Reed, S., Anguelov, D., Erhan, D., Vanhoucke, V., & Rabinovich, A. (2015). Going deeper with convolutions. In *2015 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR)* (pp. 1-9). https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.2015.7298594

169. Tran, D., Bourdev, L., Fergus, R., Torresani, L., & Paluri, M. (2015). Learning spatiotemporal features with 3D convolutional networks. In *2015 IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV)* (Vol. 2015 Inter, pp. 4489-4497). https://doi.org/10.1109/ICCV.2015.510

170. Husain, F., Dellen, B., & Torras, C. (2016). Action recognition based on efficient deep feature learning in the spatio-temporal domain. *IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters*, 1(2), 984-991. https://doi.org/10.1109/LRA.2016.2529686

171. Ji, S., Xu, W., Yang, M., & Yu, K. (2013). 3D convolutional neural networks for human action recognition. *IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence*, 35(1), 221-231. https://doi.org/10.1109/TPAMI.2012.59

172. Yun, W. H., Lee, D., Park, C., Kim, J., & Kim, J. (2020). Automatic recognition of children engagement from facial video using convolutional neural networks. *IEEE Transactions on Affective Computing*, 11(4), 696-707. https://doi.org/10.1109/TAFFC.2018.2834350

173. Rudovic, O., Utsumi, Y., Lee, J., Hernandez, J., Ferrer, E. C., Schuller, B., & Picard, R. W. (2018). CultureNet: A deep learning approach for engagement intensity estimation from face images of children with autism. In *IEEE International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems* (pp. 339-346). https://doi.org/10.1109/IROS.2018.8594177

174. Abedi, A., & Khan, S. S. (2021). Improving state-of-the-art in detecting student engagement with Resnet and TCN hybrid network. In *2021 18th Conference on Robots and Vision (CRV)* (pp. 151-157). https://doi.org/10.1109/CRV52889.2021.00028

175. Krizhevsky, A., Sutskever, I., & Hinton, G. E. (2017). ImageNet classification with deep convolutional neural networks. *Communications of the ACM*, 60(6), 84-90. https://doi.org/10.1145/3065386

176. Carreira, J., & Zisserman, A. (2017). Quo Vadis, action recognition? A new model and the kinetics dataset. In *2017 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR)* (pp. 4724-4733). https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.2017.502

177. Simonyan, K., & Zisserman, A. (2014). Very deep convolutional networks for large-scale image recognition. In *3rd International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2015-Conference Track Proceedings* (pp. 1-14).

178. Mohamad Nezami, O., Dras, M., Hamey, L., Richards, D., Wan, S., & Paris, C. (2020). Automatic recognition of student engagement using deep learning and facial expression. In *Joint European Conference on Machine Learning and Knowledge Discovery in Databases* (Vol. 2, pp. 273-289). Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-46133-1_17

179. Liu, M., Shan, S., Wang, R., & Chen, X. (2014). Learning expressionlets on spatio-temporal manifold for dynamic facial expression recognition. In *2014 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition* (pp. 1749-1756). https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.2014.226

180. Jordan, M. I. (1990). Attractor dynamics and parallelism in a connectionist sequential machine. In *Artificial Neural Networks: Concept Learning* (pp. 112-127).

181. Sharkawy, A.-N. (2020). Principle of neural network and its main types: Review. *Journal of Advances in Applied & Computational Mathematics*, 7, 8-19. https://doi.org/10.15377/2409-5761.2020.07.2

182. Hochreiter, S., & Schmidhuber, J. (1997). Long short-term memory. *Neural Computation*, 9(8), 1735-1780. https://doi.org/10.1162/neco.1997.9.8.1735

183. Liao, J., Liang, Y., & Pan, J. (2021). Deep facial spatiotemporal network for engagement prediction in online learning. *Applied Intelligence*, 51(10), 6609-6621. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10489-020-02139-8

184. Qiao, W., & Bi, X. (2020). Ternary-task convolutional bidirectional neural turing machine for assessment of EEG-based cognitive workload. *Biomedical Signal Processing and Control*, 57, 101745. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bspc.2019.101745

185. Bahdanau, D., Cho, K., & Bengio, Y. (2014). Neural machine translation by jointly learning to align and translate.

186. Simpson, P. K. (1992). Fuzzy min-max neural networks. I. Classification. *IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks*, 3(5), 776-786. https://doi.org/10.1109/72.159066

187. Gabrys, B., & Bargiela, A. (2000). General fuzzy min-max neural network for clustering and classification. *IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks*, 11(3), 769-783. https://doi.org/10.1109/72.846747

188. Hinton, G. E., Osindero, S., & Teh, Y.-W. (2006). A fast learning algorithm for deep belief nets. *Neural Computation*, 18(7), 1527-1554. https://doi.org/10.1162/neco.2006.18.7.1527

189. Dewan, M. A. A., Lin, F., Wen, D., Murshed, M., & Uddin, Z. (2018). A deep learning approach to detecting engagement of online learners. In *2018 IEEE SmartWorld, Ubiquitous Intelligence & Computing, Advanced & Trusted Computing, Scalable Computing & Communications, Cloud & Big Data Computing, Internet of People and Smart City Innovation (SmartWorld/SCALCOM/UIC/ATC/CBDCom/IOP/SCI)* (pp. 1895-1902). IEEE. https://doi.org/10.1109/SmartWorld.2018.00318

190. Bengio, Y. (2011). Deep learning of representations for unsupervised and transfer learning. In *Proceedings of the 2011 International Conference on Unsupervised and Transfer Learning Workshop-Volume 27. UTLW'11* (pp. 17-37). https://doi.org/10.5555/3045796.3045800

191. Bradley, A. P. (1997). The use of the area under the ROC curve in the evaluation of machine learning algorithms. *Pattern Recognition*, 30(7), 1145-1159. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0031-3203(96)00142-2

192. Mandrekar, J. N. (2010). Receiver operating characteristic curve in diagnostic test assessment. *Journal of Thoracic Oncology*, 5(9), 1315-1316. https://doi.org/10.1097/JTO.0b013e3181ec173d

193. Mason, S. J., & Weigel, A. P. (2009). A generic forecast verification framework for administrative purposes. *Monthly Weather Review*, 137(1), 331-349. https://doi.org/10.1175/2008MWR2553.1

194. Tingfan, W., Butko, N. J., Ruvolo, P., Whitehill, J., Bartlett, M. S., & Movellan, J. R. (2012). Multilayer architectures for facial action unit recognition. *IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, Part B (Cybernetics)*, 42(4), 1027-1038. https://doi.org/10.1109/TSMCB.2012.2195170

195. Libin, A. V., & Libin, E. V. (2004). Person-robot interactions from the robopsychologists' point of view: The robotic psychology and robotherapy approach. *Proceedings of the IEEE*, 92(11), 1789-1803. https://doi.org/10.1109/JPROC.2004.835366

196. Tincani, M., Travers, J., & Boutot, A. (2009). Race, culture, and autism spectrum disorder: Understanding the role of diversity in successful educational interventions. *Research and Practice for Persons with Severe Disabilities*, 34(3-4), 81-90. https://doi.org/10.2511/rpsd.34.3-4.81

197. Conti, D., Cattani, A., Di Nuovo, S., & Di Nuovo, A. (2015). A cross-cultural study of acceptance and use of robotics by future psychology practitioners. In *2015 24th IEEE International Symposium on Robot and Human Interactive Communication (RO-MAN)* (pp. 555-560). https://doi.org/10.1109/ROMAN.2015.7333601

198. Kapoor, S., Nanayakkara, P., Peng, K., Pham, H., & Narayanan, A. (2022). The reproducibility crisis in ML-based science. https://sites.google.com/princeton.edu/rep-workshop

199. DeepLearning.AI. (2022). Bad Machine Learning Makes Bad Science. https://info.deeplearning.ai/science-plagued-by-machine-learning-mistakes-deepfakes-censor-profanity-wearable-ai-helps-impaired-walking-ensemble-models-simplified-1

200. Kapoor, S., & Narayanan, A. (2022). Leakage and the reproducibility crisis in ML-based science. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2207.07048

201. Yun, W.-H., Lee, D., Park, C., & Kim, J. (2015). Automatic engagement level estimation of kids in a learning environment. *International Journal of Machine Learning and Computing*, 5(2), 148-152. https://doi.org/10.7763/IJMLC.2015.V5.499

202. Hussain, M., Zhu, W., Zhang, W., & Abidi, S. M. R. (2018). Student engagement predictions in an e-learning system and their impact on student course assessment scores. *Computational Intelligence and Neuroscience*. https://doi.org/10.1155/2018/6347186

203. Ninaus, M., Greipl, S., Kiili, K., Lindstedt, A., Huber, S., Klein, E., et al. (2019). Increased emotional engagement in game-based learning—A machine learning approach on facial emotion detection data. *Computers & Education*, 142, 103641. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2019.103641

204. Delgado, K., Origgi, J. M., Hasanpoor, T., Yu, H., Allessio, D., Arroyo, I., Lee, W., Betke, M., Woolf, B., & Bargal, S. A. (2021). Student engagement dataset. In *Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision* (Vol. 2021-October, pp. 3621-3629). IEEE. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICCVW54120.2021.00405

205. Thomas, C., Puneeth Sarma, K. A. V., Swaroop Gajula, S., & Jayagopi, D. B. (2022). Automatic prediction of presentation style and student engagement from videos. *Computers and Education: Artificial Intelligence*, 3, 100079. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.caeai.2022.100079

206. Larson, R., & Csikszentmihalyi, M. (2014). The experience sampling method. In *Flow and the Foundations of Positive Psychology* (pp. 21-34). Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-94-017-9088-8_2

207. Watson, D., Clark, L. A., & Tellegen, A. (1988). Development and validation of brief measures of positive and negative affect: The PANAS scales. *Journal of Personality and Social Psychology*, 54(6), 1063-1070. https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.54.6.1063

208. Wagner, J., Kim, J., & André, E. (2005). From physiological signals to emotions: Implementing and comparing selected methods for feature extraction and classification. In *2005 IEEE International Conference on Multimedia and Expo* (pp. 940-943). IEEE. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICME.2005.1521579

209. Joho, H., Staiano, J., Sebe, N., & Jose, J. M. (2011). Looking at the viewer: Analysing facial activity to detect personal highlights of multimedia contents. *Multimedia Tools and Applications*, 51(2), 505-523. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11042-010-0632-x

210. Eyben, F., Weninger, F., Gross, F., & Schuller, B. (2013). Recent developments in openSMILE, the munich open-source multimedia feature extractor. In *Proceedings of the 21st ACM International Conference on Multimedia* (pp. 835-838). ACM. https://doi.org/10.1145/2502081.2502224

211. Howard, A. G., Zhu, M., Chen, B., Kalenichenko, D., Wang, W., Weyand, T., Andreetto, M., & Adam, H. (2017). MobileNets: Efficient convolutional neural networks for mobile vision applications. *arXiv* abs/1704.04861.

212. Chollet, F. (2017). Xception: Deep learning with depthwise separable convolutions. In *2017 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR)* (pp. 1800-1807). https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.2017.195

213. ClassX, LectureVideoDB, IIIT-AR-13K, IIITB Online Lecture, IIITB Classroom Lecture dataset.

214. Deng, D., Chen, Z., Zhou, Y., & Shi, B. (2020). MIMAMO Net: Integrating micro- and macro-motion for video emotion recognition. In *Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence* (pp. 2621-2628). https://doi.org/10.1609/aaai.v34i03.5646