# Antecedents of Employee Experience: A Systematic Review of Literature

## Abstract

**Background:** The employee experience literature suggests that to reap the benefits of employee experience, it is important to delve into the antecedents of employee experience and leverage it to achieve individual and organizational level outcomes.

**Objective:** The existing literature lacks consensus on the term "employee experience" and its antecedents; hence, this study aims to conceptualize the term "employee experience" and study in-depth its antecedents as reported in the literature.

**Method:** The study uses systematic literature review (SLR) methodology along with relational analysis to achieve the objectives identified for this paper.

**Conclusion:** The authors successfully provide a working definition of employee experience for theory and practice and have categorized the 46 antecedents of employee experience (identified from 28 journal articles) into two types, viz. individual and organizational. This comprehensive listing of antecedents, whether empirically examined or not, is expected to aid researchers and practitioners alike in practice, research, and theory building.

**Keywords:** Employee experience, Antecedents of employee experience, Organizational antecedents, Individual antecedents, Systematic literature review

Employee experience emerged as a topic of discussion in 1999; however, it has gained traction in the last three years and is reported as a dominant topic of discussion amongst leadership by 81% of the global firms [1]. Service companies like Walt Disney or Sheraton mention that their reputation is tied to how they provide the experience in the moment to their consumers, and for consumer service to be of good quality, these companies believe that the people who are at the frontline—that is, their employees—must be highly motivated and engaged—a process linked to good employee experience [2]. According to Gartner's Report, good employee experience results in customer satisfaction, profitability, productivity, work performance, and worker retention [3]. While the overarching implication behind studying employee experience is the importance of satisfying customers to retain them for profit making, according to Morgan [4], only around 6% of companies can be classified as experiential. Yet, these companies account for twice the average revenue, 4 times the average profits, 40% lesser turnover, and a 24% smaller headcount. However, while trying to understand the motivators that keep employees engaged and committed at work, businesses are barely scratching the surface. Employee experience contextualization prompts employers to consider the holistic impact of the various ways in which the organization interacts with workers [1].

While seemingly new to the scholarly community, more than 70 articles have appeared on employee experience in reports, journals, and various open sources across a variety of academic disciplines [5–14]. There are well-researched empirical articles that showcase employee experience. Studies suggest that a good employee experience impacts employee satisfaction, employee retention, employee commitment, employee performance, employee happiness, employee attitude, work effectiveness, and employee engagement [5,6,15–23]. However, employee experience is not restricted to only employee-level outcomes but also impacts organizational-level consequences such as: (a) customers through customer satisfaction, service, retention, and revenue; organizational growth through profitability, stock price, revenue, growth, and productivity; employer brand through organizational reputation, pride, and attracting talent; and organizational culture through leadership support, innovation, diversity, going green, and structures and processes [15,16,18,21,24,25]. As a result, organizations have now started focusing on enhancing employee experience.

Research suggests that precursors or antecedents of experience will aid in the development of a highly motivated workforce. Practitioners are better equipped if they identify potential antecedents in their organization and can handle potential challenges, present executable strategies to stakeholders, and communicate clearer direction and vision to their employees. It is important that the antecedents should be in place for organizations to have an excellent employee experience. The suggested antecedents are many; however, evidence for their use is less and is scattered across literature.

**TABLE 1**
Summary of the literature reviewed

| Document Type      | Count | Percentage |
|--------------------|-------|------------|
| Journal Article    | 32    | 55%        |
| Thesis             | 8     | 14%        |
| Magazine Article   | 4     | 7%         |
| Report             | 6     | 10%        |
| Case               | 3     | 5%         |
| Conference Paper   | 2     | 3%         |
| Blogpost           | 1     | 2%         |
| Interview          | 1     | 2%         |
| Book               | 1     | 2%         |
| **Totals:**        | **58**| **100%**   |
*Note: Compiled by researchers from review of literature.*

The objectives of this research, thus, are: (1) to provide a working definition of the term "employee experience," and (2) to evaluate the precursors or antecedents of experience that exist in the literature, whether tested with or without data, and to finalize a list for use in practice, research, or theory building. The major research questions are: (1) How do we define employee experience as per the literature? and (2) What are the antecedents to a good experience?

The research discusses the method of research, leading toward discussions and understanding of the findings, and concludes with implications for academia and industry.

## 1. Method

Employee experience is an emerging and evolving topic in the literature; hence, systematic literature review (SLR) methodology, as explained by Tranfield, Denyer, and Smart [26], has been used for this study. SLR advises the use of contemporary and academic literature sources for finalizing the research hypothesis and study objectives. The SLR helped in building the conceptual base for the present inquiry by identifying pertinent issues and relevant variables affecting employee experience. According to the SLR methodology, the review has been divided into three stages: planning the review, conducting the review, and discussion of the conceptual model.

### 1.1. Stage 1: Planning the Review

A scientific study cannot start without a literature review. To begin, we identified data sources and searched for their representation of employee experience in the management and psychology field. To undertake systematic research, first, the keywords were identified. These include *employee experience* and *antecedents of employee experience*. About 70 articles emerged from the search, which included articles of both academic and contemporary nature. The list includes (but is not restricted to) articles from *Human Resource Management*, *Organization Management Journal*, *Work & Family*, *Workforce Solutions Review*, *Strategic HR Review*, *Career Development International*, *Community, Work and Family*, *Development and Learning in Organizations*, *Harvard Business Review*, *Society for Human Resource Management*, *Strategic HR Review*, etc. Ensuing from these search results, a list of over 58 relevant articles was built up (refer to Table 1 for details). Subsequently, relevant citations (studies pertaining to employee experience and its antecedents) were separated for carrying out a detailed evaluation. This synthesis resulted in a narrative review, giving insights on what has been already written on the proposed subject/topic, thus aiding in providing a competing review and evidence on the subject.

Delivery of reliable results has been ensured by minimizing the inclusion of secondary sources, and genuineness and authenticity of the facts have been assured by examining the assumptions.

#### 1.1.1. Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria

To select the most relevant studies for academia and industry, three inclusion criteria were specified: first, only studies that used "employee experience" or "antecedents of employee experience" in their keywords or titles were used; second, peer-reviewed journal articles and industry reports published in English language were included; third, studies that either defined the term "employee experience" or mentioned the antecedents of employee experience were included. To further ensure a robust selection, three exclusion criteria were specified for eliminating non-relevant studies: first, studies on employee experience in a language other than English were excluded; second, all theses, magazine articles, cases, conference papers, blogposts, books, and interviews were excluded; third, journal articles that mentioned the measures and consequences or outcomes of employee experience were excluded (Fig. 1).

**FIGURE 1**
Selection procedure

*Segment 1/2:*
Potentially Relevant content Identified and Screened n = 70
Excluded n = 13
Relevant Content with relevant keywords n = 58
Content Articles which did not meet inclusion n = 30
Full Journal Articles & Industry Reports with definitions and antecedents on Employee Experience n = 28

*Segment 2/2:*
Excluded n = 13 Article 13

*Note: Created by the researcher.*

### 1.2. Stage 2: Conducting the Review

At this stage, a review of the articles on employee experience relevant to the present study was undertaken in a structured format to understand the conceptualization of the term "employee experience" and to identify the antecedents of employee experience. Out of the 28 journal articles and reports studied, 15 studies reported antecedents, 7 reported definitions, and 6 reported both definitions and antecedents. Out of these 28, 21 were empirically tested and 7 were theoretical studies. Refer to Table 2.

**TABLE 2**
Summary of the split of the literature studies

| Type of Study/Content     | Definitions | Definitions & Antecedents | Antecedents | Total |
|---------------------------|--------------|----------------------------|-------------|-------|
| Empirical – Quantitative  | 4            | 5                          | 10          | 19    |
| Empirical – Qualitative   |              |                            | 2           | 2     |
| Theoretical               | 3            | 1                          | 3           | 7     |
| **Total**                 | **7**        | **6**                      | **15**      | **28**|
*Note: Compiled by researchers from review of literature.*

From the 13 articles studied, we found 16 varying definitions of employee experience that could be broadly categorized into 3 categories. These include: (i) experience as a "sum of employee perception about workplace interactions"; (ii) employee experience as a "connection, meaning and impact of work in the workplace"; and (iii) employee experience as "passion and purpose, two-way contract and impact via technology." Each of these has been explained in detail below.

#### i. Employee Experience as a "Sum of Employee Perceptions"

The most common definition given for employee experience revolves around the sum of employee perceptions about the interactions that an employee has at work with the people, practices, and platforms available. Plaskoff [27] in his research echoed the same thoughts about employee's holistic perceptions for all the touchpoints during his/her journey in the organization. Rao [28] mentioned that these perceptions can be good or bad based on how positively or negatively employees perceive the intent of the organization. Rao postulated that the employee experience can transform an organization. In a report published by IBM [15], the author mentioned that these perceptions are usually in response to organizational interactions. McClane [29] in his definition mentioned that these interactions can be with colleagues, customers, leadership, the physical work environment, and systems/processes. In 2020, a Gartner report discussed how employees internalize and interpret the interactions. Yildiz et al. [24] said that it is a result of connection, meaning, appreciation, and impact that individuals experience within the work environment while interacting with values, technology, colleagues, customers, physical environment, management, and work itself. It requires shifting the perspective from efficiency to experience. Gheidar and ShamiZanjani [30] discussed digital employee experience and stated that it is the holistic outcome of an employee's perceptions in the digital workplace.

#### ii. Employee Experience as "Connections, Meaning and Impact of Work in the Workplace"

According to Deloitte Insights, employee experience is an overall view of work life, requiring constant monitoring, action, and feedback [31]. Berson, Flynn, Mazor, and Melian [32] mentioned that employee experience extends beyond the career and growth opportunities provided in the organization. Morgan [4] conceptualized that employee experience is the effect created by three dimensions: work culture, technology, and workplace. Vieira dos Santos [33] mentioned that employee experience involves enabling employees to shape their workplace by providing them ownership and building that relationship and connection with employees.

#### iii. Employee Experience as "Passion and Purpose, Two-Way Contract and Impact via Technology"

According to Humu, a company attempting to redesign employee experience, the application of machine learning capabilities, latest scientific studies, and basic human kindness can enhance the experience of work for everyone, everywhere [34, p. 2].

Usmani and Khan [35] revealed that when employees' expectations were fulfilled, it tends to create a relational contract, which ultimately results in high work performance, implying the give and take between employee and employer. According to Dhingra and Emmet [36], employee experience is the organization and its employees working in tandem to enable authentic and customized experiences igniting passion and helping employees tap into their purpose to strengthen organization, team, and individual performance.

##### 1.2.1. Definition of Employee Experience

Synthesizing the different definitions of employee experience present in literature, an emergent definition of the concept for this study is proposed as under:

Employee experience can be conceptualized as the sum of interactions that are influenced by employees' perceptions of the individual and the organizational factors within the workplace.

The above definition focuses on the perception of an employee about the interactions they have with the processes and people in the organization. These interactions can be individual-specific and organization-specific as well. The logic behind conceptualizing this definition is that experience is an individual-specific phenomenon; therefore, while organizational policies, practices, and people have an impact on all employees, how each individual employee is impacted by them and their perception about the same creates their experience.

##### 1.2.2. Employee Experience Antecedents

Relational analysis, a text-scanning technique conducted to understand the relationship between concepts [37], was adopted to identify antecedents for employee experience. After reviewing the data gathered from literature, a principle emerged depending on the level of antecedent application. Thus, (a) individual and (b) organizational antecedents are the two levels at which antecedents were found. We developed a concept map (see Table 3), following Fornes et al. [38], to depict relationships between antecedents and employee experience. The map was used to address one of the main objectives laid down for this study and has been shared as a visual framework (in Table 3) for showcasing leverage points for academia and industry to develop, improve, and debate further the study on employee experience.

**TABLE 3**
Concept map of antecedents of employee experience

| Organization Level Antecedents                                | Individual Antecedents                                      |
|---------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------|
| Existence, Implementation & Communication of HR Policies     | Employment type (part time or full time)*                   |
| Sourcing and recruiting                                       | Employee Identity as a perspective of Sexual Orientation*   |
| Pre-boarding                                                  | Empathy*                                                    |
| Onboarding (orientation and initial training)                 | Personalization*                                            |
| Flexibility & Work Life Balance*                              | Employment status (i.e., current vs. former)*               |
| Performance Management                                        | Tenure*                                                     |
| Ethics Policy*                                                | Trust*                                                      |
| Recognition and Reward*                                       | Simplicity*                                                 |
| Compensation and Benefits                                     | Authenticity*                                               |
| Leave Policy – Family, Parental & Medical Leave*              | Responsiveness*                                             |
| Exit Policy – retirement, termination, or resignation         | Career Decision*                                            |
| Relocation Policy*                                            | Meaningful work                                             |
| Organization Culture*                                         | Career Goals and Experimentation*                           |
| Communication*                                                | Personal moments that matter*                               |
| Transparent*                                                  | Job Satisfaction*                                           |
| Awareness                                                     | Job Autonomy*                                               |
| Empowerment and Voice*                                        | Individual Purpose*                                         |
| Innovation*                                                   |                                                             |
| Inspirational*                                                |                                                             |
| Hypocrisy*                                                    |                                                             |
| Human Capital Development*                                    |                                                             |
| Job Stability & Security*                                     |                                                             |
| Knowledge Sharing*                                            |                                                             |
| Coaching*                                                     |                                                             |
| L&D and Training Opportunity*                                 |                                                             |
| Continuous and Constructive Feedback*                         |                                                             |
| Transformational Leadership*                                  |                                                             |
| Participative Management*                                     |                                                             |
| Coworker relationships*                                       |                                                             |
| Contact and Support from Supervisors*                         |                                                             |
| Physical Environment*                                         |                                                             |
| Digitization and Use of Technology*                           |                                                             |
*Note: Compiled by researchers from review of literature.*  
**X denotes empirically tested antecedents.*

Out of the 28 journal articles and industry reports studied, 21 reported one or more antecedents of employee experience. Out of these 21, 17 studies were empirically tested and 4 were theoretical (refer to Table 2). Most studies reported physical working environment, interpersonal relations with co-workers and leaders, technological environment, and organization's culture (including organizational climate and internal policies; values, understandings, assumptions, and norms shared; and feelings that employees get when they are inside of an organization) as the antecedents of employee experience. All 21 journal articles and reports were reviewed by both authors.

### 1.3. Stage 3: Discussion of the Conceptual Model

Antecedents of experience are the strategies and constructs that are precursors to the development of employee experience and come before reaping the benefits of these outcomes. The outcomes can be aspects such as productivity enhancement and turnover reduction. Considering this, a conceptual model of the antecedents has been developed, identifying them into two categories: (a) individual and (b) organizational. Individual-level antecedents are the perceptions an employee has about his/her experience at the workplace in response to their interactions with the organization. These interactions can be regarding an individual's work, his/her relationships, and his/her opportunities for growth within the organization. Organizational-level antecedents are the company's culture, reward systems, and learning and career growth opportunities offered to an employee, and these factors can both make or break the employee's experience, both inside the company and outside it. Individual indicators are thus defined as the constructs and conditions that are intrinsic to individuals and are applied to or by individual employees and that are believed to be foundational to a good employee experience. Organizational-level indicators are constructs and conditions that are extrinsic to and applied organization-wide as a foundation to good employee experience at the systematic and structural level.

Table 3 shows organizational and individual antecedents and indicates the antecedents that are empirically tested. Out of the 49 antecedents, 32 were organizational-level antecedents and 17 were individual-level antecedents. Out of the 32 organization-level antecedents, 24 have been empirically tested in the existing literature, and 16 out of 17 individual antecedents have been empirically tested in the existing literature. Authors appropriately categorized every article and reported the antecedents into the right category. Although there was no overlap between individual and organizational antecedents, further research might be required to throw light on common domains as the connection is plausible. The next section discusses the summary of both organizational and individual antecedents in the context of employee experience. Refer to the appendix to understand the sources of antecedents.

## 2. Discussion and Conclusions

### 2.1. Discussion of Antecedents of Employee Experience

The research has shown that antecedents or predictors of employee experience can be typically categorized into two types: organizational and individual. The antecedents of employee experience identified for this study are grounded in the extant literature; supporting literature for the organizational and individual antecedents of employee experience is presented as under.

Rothe, Sarasoja, and Heywood [39] in their study explored how relocation policy and change influence the experience of an employee in the organization. Another paper [40] studied how family and medical leave policy and communication of these policies had an impact on the experience of an employee. One of the reports by Gartner [15] suggests that employee experience is impacted by HR practices such as onboarding updates, flexible work introduction (i.e., remote work policies), parental leave expansion, L&D program expansion, workplace redesign, employee-facing technology upgrades, and performance management updates. Yildiz et al. [24] suggested that human capital development is one of the key reasons responsible for shaping employee experience in an organization. This includes training opportunity, openness to experimentation, empowerment, and career goals and experimentation.

Organizational culture has been identified as another key antecedent of employee experience in the literature. Kiefer et al. [41] in their research showed that employee experience is impacted by budget reduction and budget-related changes, which in turn impacts the scope of innovation in any work environment. Corporate hypocrisy was showcased as one of the factors that negatively impacted employee experience [42].

An IBM report established that co-worker relationships, organizational trust, meaningful work, feedback, recognition, and growth, empowerment, voice, and work-life balance impact employee experience [43]. In their paper, mention the dependency that rewards and recognition has on job satisfaction, in turn on employee experience. Lee et al. [19] suggested that implicit and explicit ethics institutionalization also impacts what employees feel in an organization [44]; mention the impact of corporate social responsibility in enhancement of organizational performance with employee retention, employee attraction, and customer satisfaction as sub-factors. Ngwane [18] in her thesis discussed how alignment to purpose, innovation and leading technology, alignment to organizational purpose, remuneration, development including meaningful growth, the building and physical environment, leadership, the brand and people, and job security impact employee experience. Emmett et al. [45] in her thesis mentioned that secure, stable work experience, social cohesion, trusting relationships, and individual contribution and purpose contributed to a workplace with great employee experience. Williams [46] coined the term "digital culture" and discussed how collectivism, indulgence, autonomy, long-term orientation, power distance, and tolerance to uncertainty contribute to digital employee experience. Cool spaces and technologies used are also found to be contributing factors to the same [25].

Employee experience has also been found to be dependent on many individual-level factors such as awareness and reduced ambiguity [47]; employee identity as a perspective of sexual orientation and career decision [48]; whether the organizational practices have personalization, transparency, simplicity, authenticity, and responsiveness [49]; and control variables such as job characteristics, work relationships [22]; employment type (part-time vs. full-time), employment status (current vs. former), and tenure [12].

### 2.2. Implications for Research

This research adds to the highly informative yet limited body of research available in the genre of employee experience and can serve as a reference for future researchers doing work in this field. The study presents the three schools of thought that exist in the literature for the term "employee experience" and creates a working definition based on the existing literature. The study further elaborates on the definition by conducting a systematic literature review and reviewing 32 journal articles to identify 49 overall antecedents bifurcated into two areas: organizational and individual antecedents. These antecedents are then represented using a concept map identifying the empirically tested and non-empirically tested antecedents. Thus, employee experience can only be enhanced if all these antecedents—i.e., HR policies; organizational culture, management and leadership, human capital development, and physical environment supported by technological advancements—are taken care of. However, merely keeping a check on environmental organizational factors is not enough. To keep employee experience intact, individual antecedents such as career goals, meaningful work, job autonomy, and job satisfaction must also be considered. These antecedents give rise to moments that matter to an individual, giving rise to the feeling of trust, empathy, responsiveness, authenticity, and personalization, thus leading to either good or bad experiences for employees. These feelings could vary also depending upon the employee's sexual identity, employment type, and employment status.

The literature scarcity on experience in human resource management journals is unfortunate, due to which many of the individual employee experience antecedents are yet to be studied by scholars and practitioners; these include personality, age, generation, etc. [50]. This review only discusses the separate categories of individual versus organizational antecedents and is only a proposal. Future researchers should focus on the links between these two categories, overlaps if any, and the points of leverage. For instance, a supportive organizational culture is linked to perceived responsiveness. Understanding these dynamics—what is considered supportive by employees and their perceptions—could be key to enhancing the way organizations communicate to their employees. Further questions to be asked as part of future research are: "Is a successful and supportive organizational climate necessary for employees to give more?" and "Can employees identify artificially developed motivational environments?"

Currently, out of the 46 antecedents, 39 are empirically tested; therefore, for future researchers, it is important that all the antecedents are empirically tested to create a robust framework at an organizational and individual level.

### 2.3. Implications for Practice

The study has first provided a working definition of employee experience to managers. Using this knowledge, managers can focus on building perceptions across individual and organizational dimensions to deliver superior employee experience.

Organizations need to ensure that the experience aspect is kept into consideration at every point of the employee journey, starting with sourcing and recruitment; pre-onboarding and onboarding; by having the right kind of policies with workplace flexibility; performance management; reward and recognition; compensation and benefits; leave policy; exit policy; and relocation policy. The mere listing of these policies is not enough, but implementation and communication of the same is needed. These policies then need to be complemented by the culture that an organization has, which should be transparent and inspirational, empowering employees to innovate and have their own voice. Organizational hypocrisy negatively impacts employee experience [42]. The organization shall also provide employees opportunities to grow and enhance their profiles by undergoing training and upskilling.

Managers in the industries must ensure that both individual and organizational antecedents are present so that the employee experience is good. For this purpose, they can emulate the best practices followed by managers in companies like Sheraton, which have been cited as providing good employee experience. One of the ways this can be implemented is by taking regular feedback on how the employee feels regarding the various organizational precedents and involving employees in the implementation process. Innovative organizations have approached employees for inspiration. Airbnb, IBM, Cisco, and GE have used hackathons to collect employee ideas and design new approaches for workplace design, performance management, rewards, and benefits. These collaborative approaches engage employees in designing a "perfect" employee experience [31,51]. Managers and leaders who are the face of an organization to employees are the key contributors to employee experience, and it is important that sensitization and training of managers to implement and communicate the policies of the organization be conducted. Human capital development, such as training opportunity, openness to experimentation, empowerment, and career goals and experimentation, have been identified as key antecedents from review of literature; hence, investing in upskilling and training opportunities by organizations is of extreme importance. Another very important area of concern for managers is to understand their teams and their employees—not to act only as a manager but to be a coach and a guide; to understand their career aspirations and to provide meaningful work that aligns with the same. The IBM report mentions that by providing personalization, organizations will be able to create a better fit between the needs of employees and the needs of the organization; by providing simplicity, organizations will be able to remove non-value-added activities and information to streamline experiences; by providing authenticity, organizations will align experiences to the organization's culture and value system; and by providing responsiveness, organizations will allow both employee and employer to share information and modify actions [49]. Many leading firms are incorporating design thinking to improve overall employee experience. Nike, Commonwealth Bank of Australia, Telstra, Deutsche Telekom, and several other companies have redesigned their onboarding, recruitment, and employee self-service applications. In each case, the organization developed a new set of mobile apps, new user experiences, or new service delivery solutions to improve and simplify life at work. For example, at Ford, a global listening practice is implemented to understand effective and problematic employee experience practices. Similarly, Facebook, Google, LinkedIn, Gensler, and Leesman have designed their workplaces with innovation, personalized recreation, and collaboration in novel ways [31, pp. 57–58; 52]. In terms of employer branding, Saini and Jawahar [12] suggested that new joiners who are still in the process of learning about the organization are influenced more by employer rankings compared to longer-tenure employees. Also, recommendations by new joiners are more affected by their experience in the organization than those of tenured employees. It is also suggested that full-time employees are likely to be more vested and integrated in their organizations than part-time employees, and their satisfaction with rewards and benefits is of importance and impact; therefore, employer branding is impacted more by the employment experience provided to full-time employees than to part-time ones [12]. Therefore, to enhance employer brand using employment experience, managers and leaders must focus on full-time newcomers or new joiners who recommend the organization as a great place to work.

### 2.4. Conclusion

Using the SLR lens, the study reports that the idea that a good employee experience leads to positive outcomes for employees as well as organizations—such as enhanced employee engagement, reduced employee turnover, profitability, revenue, and employer brand—is consistent and conceptually connected. The topic has seen a lot of traction in recent years; however, research conducted is extremely disjointed. A strong need for an end-to-end study from definitions to antecedents to measures and consequences of employee experience is needed, wherein the relationship between each of these can be identified. Researchers in the future can use the SLR methodology showcased in the paper and identify the measures and consequences of employee experience. Using the definitions and antecedents provided in this paper, and identifying future measures and consequences, a theoretical model can be created. The robustness of the theoretical model can then be empirically tested in various industries and geographies.

## Conflicts of Interest

All authors have participated in (a) conception and design, or analysis and interpretation of the data; (b) drafting the article or revising it critically for important intellectual content; and (c) approval of the final version.

This manuscript has not been submitted to, nor is under review at, another journal or other publishing venue.

The authors have no affiliation with any organization with a direct or indirect financial interest in the subject matter discussed in the manuscript.

## Appendix

**Antecedents Reported from Literature**

| S No. | Antecedents                                                                                                                               | Citation                     |
|-------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------|
| 1     | Contact and Support from Supervisors*                                                                                                     | [5]                          |
| 2     | Perceived availability of the number of Flexible Work Arrangements*; different types of Flexible Work Arrangements*; and actual use of Flexible Work Arrangements* | [6]                          |
| 3     | Secure work experience (Workplace security, Financial stability, Mental Health, Reward); Trusting relationships (Trustworthy Colleagues, Recognition for work); Social inclusion and cohesion (Fair Treatment, Having supportive coworkers); Individual contribution and purpose (Goal Achievement, Private Life Balance, Purpose Fulfillment)* | [45]                         |
| 4     | Culture influences the experience*; Onboarding updates*; Flexible work introduction (i.e., remote work policies)*; Parental leave expansion*; L&D program expansion*; Workplace redesign*; Employee-facing technology upgrades*; Performance management updates*; The EVP reflects the intended experience* | [15]                         |
| 5     | Corporate Hypocrisy*                                                                                                                      | [42]                         |
| 6     | Organizational trust*; Coworker relationships*; Meaningful work*; Recognition, feedback and growth*; Empowerment and voice*; Work-life balance*                                                         | [53]                         |
| 7     | Cut Back and Budget Reduction; Innovation related Changes*                                                                                | [41]                         |
| 8     | Design Thinking; Empathy*; Iterations*                                                                                                    | [20]                         |
| 9     | Explicit Ethics Institutionalization*; Implicit Ethics Institutionalization*                                                              | [19]                         |
| 10    | Personalization; Transparency; Simplicity; Authenticity; Responsiveness                                                                   | [49]                         |
| 11    | Employee Experience is the constellation of interactions that enterprise members have with leadership, colleagues, customers, systems/processes, physical work environment*                               | [29]                         |
| 12    | Employee Identity as a perspective of Sexual Orientation*; Career Decision                                                                | [48]                         |
| 13    | Culture*; Technology*; Physical Environment*                                                                                              | [4]                          |
| 14    | Awareness; Reduction of Ambiguity                                                                                                         | [47]                         |
| 15    | Relocation Policy*; Relocation Change*                                                                                                    | [39]                         |
| 16    | Employment type (i.e., full-time vs. part-time)*; employment status (i.e., current vs. former)*; tenure*                                  | [12]                         |
| 17    | Organizational Culture – comprising of Organizational Climate, Internal Policies, Leadership Qualities*                                    | [54]                         |
| 18    | Job satisfaction – A combination of Career Growth Path, Skills and Qualifications, Job Matching, Rewards and Recognition and Job Autonomy* | [55]                         |
| 19    | Digital Culture (Collectivism, Indulgence, Autonomy, Long-term orientation, Power Distance, Tolerance to uncertainty)*                     | [46]                         |
| 20    | Communication (Knowledge Sharing, Continuous and Constructive Feedback, Transparent and Open Communication, Collaborative Work Environment)*; Leadership (Coaching, Inspiration, Transformational Leadership, Participative Management)*; Positive Organization Culture (Common Vision and Commitment, Flexibility & Work Life Balance, Fairness and Trust, Recognition and Reward Based Culture)*; Human Capital Development Opportunity (Empowerment, Training Opportunity, Open to Experimentation, Career Goals and Experimentation)* | [24] |
| 21    | Recruiting & Sourcing, Onboarding & Pre-Onboarding (orientation and initial training), Benefits & Compensation, Learning and Development, Communication, Engagement & Community Involvement, Performance Planning, feedback and review, Rewards & Recognition, Performance Feedback & Planning, Career Advancement, resignation, termination, or retirement | [16] |
*Note: Compiled by the researchers.*  
**X: Antecedents are empirically tested.*

## References

1. The Economist Intelligence Unit. (2019). *The experience of work*. The Economist.

2. Brown, S. P., & Lam, S. K. (2008). A meta-analysis of relationships linking employee satisfaction to customer responses. *Journal of Retailing, 84*(3), 234–255.

3. Rodenhuis, E. (2019). *What is employee experience and what do HR, IT and internal comms need to know to make it successful?* Retrieved from Workgrid: https://www.workgrid.com/blog/2019/10/31/what-is-employee-experience.

4. Morgan, J. (2017). *The employee experience advantage*. Wiley.

5. Buys, N. J., Selander, J., & Sun, J. (2019). Employee experience of workplace supervisor contact and support during long-term sickness absence. *Disability and Rehabilitation, 41*(7), 808–814. https://doi.org/10.1080/09638288.2017.1410584

6. Chen, Y., & Fulmer, I. S. (2018). Fine-tuning what we know about employees' experience with flexible work arrangements and their job attitudes. *Human Resource Management, 57*(1), 381–395. https://doi.org/10.1002/hrm.21849

7. Hellman, T., Molin, F., & Svartengren, M. (2019). A qualitative study on employees' experiences of a support model for systematic work environment management. *International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health, 16*(19). https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph16193551

8. Lee, D. J., et al. (2018). The effects of explicit and implicit ethics institutionalization on employee life satisfaction and happiness: The mediating effects of employee experiences in work life and moderating effects of work–family life conflict. *Journal of Business Ethics, 147*(4), 855–874. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10551-015-2984-7

9. Ngwane, N. (2019). *The role of employee experience as a driver of performance* (Vol. 8). Gordon Institute of Business Science. https://doi.org/10.22201/fq.18708404e.2004.3.66178

10. Richards, A. W. (2019). *Improving the employee transition experience: A practical business application for design thinking*.

11. Rönnberg, D. (2018). *Employee experience during acquisitions: A case study of an acquiring company* (pp. 1–79).

12. Saini, G. K., & Jawahar, I. M. (2019). The influence of employer rankings, employment experience, and employee characteristics on employer branding as an employer of choice. *Career Development International, 24*(7), 636–657. https://doi.org/10.1108/CDI-11-2018-0290

13. Santos, C., & Garibaldi de Hilal, A. V. (2020). The work-life interface and the role of HR: Employee experiences in Brazil. *Community, Work and Family, 23*(4), 439–456. https://doi.org/10.1080/13668803.2018.1547270

14. Tran, H., & Smith, D. A. (2020). Designing an employee experience approach to teacher retention in hard-to-staff schools. *NASSP Bulletin, 104*(2), 85–109. https://doi.org/10.1177/0192636520927092

15. Gartner. (2020). *The modern employee experience: Increasing the returns on employee experience investments overview* (pp. 1–16). Gartner.

16. Yohn, D. L. (2016). Design your employee experience as thoughtfully as you design your customer experience. *Harvard Business Review*, 8–11. www.hbr.org.

17. Maryniak, K. (2017). Enhancing the new nurse experience: Creation of a new employee training unit. *Nursing Economic$, 35*(6), 322–326.

18. Ngwane, N. (2019). *The role of employee experience as a driver of performance*. Gordon Institute of Business Science.

19. Lee, D. J., et al. (2018). The effects of explicit and implicit ethics institutionalization on employee life satisfaction and happiness: The mediating effects of employee experiences in work life and moderating effects of work–family life conflict. *Journal of Business Ethics, 147*(4), 855–874. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10551-015-2984-7

20. King, R., Durai, T., & Madhanagopal, R. (2018). Human-centric design thinking to boost employee experience in lean startups – An empirical study. *Journal of Emerging Technologies and Innovative Research, 5*(12), 575–588. www.jetir.org.

21. Sinha, A., Varkkey, B., & Meenakshi, N. (2019). Design thinking for improving employee experience: A case of a food tech company. *Development and Learning in Organizations, 34*(1), 8–11. https://doi.org/10.1108/DLO-11-2018-0154

22. Rönnberg, D. (2018). *Employee experience during acquisitions: A case study of an acquiring company*.

23. IBM. (2017). *The employee experience index* (pp. 1–14). IBM Analytics – Thought Leadership Whitepaper.

24. Yildiz, D., et al. (2020). Evaluation of positive employee experience using hesitant fuzzy analytic hierarchy process. *Journal of Intelligent and Fuzzy Systems, 38*(1), 1043–1058. https://doi.org/10.3233/JIFS-179467

25. Ryynänen, A. (2020). *The role of employee communications in employee experiences: Case company X*. Haaga Helia University of Applied Sciences.

26. Tranfield, D., Denyer, D., & Smart, P. (2003). Towards a methodology for developing evidence-informed management knowledge by means of systematic review. *British Journal of Management, 14*, 207–222.

27. Plaskoff, J. (2017). Employee experience: The new human resource management approach. *Strategic HR Review, 16*(3), 136–141. https://doi.org/10.1108/shr-12-2016-0108

28. Rao, V. P. (2017). *Demystifying employee experience*. Innovatus Marketers Touchpoint. http://marketerstouchpoint.com/blog/demystifying-employee-experience/.

29. McClane, W. E. (2018). Strategically create the employee experience: Redefining the HR operating model. *Workforce Solutions Review*, (1), 64–75.

30. Gheidar, Y., & ShamiZanjani, M. (2020). Conceptualizing the digital employee experience. *Strategic HR Review, 19*(3), 131–135. https://doi.org/10.1108/shr-01-2020-0004

31. Deloitte. (2017). *Global human capital trends report and survey*. Deloitte University Press.

32. Berson, J., Flynn, J., Mazor, A., & Melian, V. (2017). The employee experience: Culture, engagement and beyond. In *Rewriting the rules for the digital age: 2017 Deloitte Global Human Capital Trends* (pp. 51–61).

33. Vieira dos Santos, C. (2018). *The work-life interface and the role of HR: Employee experiences in Brazil*. (See [13]).

34. Oesch, K. (2018). *Humu: Redesigning employee experience*. (as cited in Oesch, 2018, p. 2).

35. Usmani, K. A., & Khan, F. S. (2017). Understanding psychological contract: Long-term investment for business sustainability. *Management Dynamics, 17*(2), 60–69.

36. Dhingra, N., & Emmet, J. (2013). Igniting individual purpose in times of crisis: Creating strong links to an individual purpose benefits individuals and companies alike. *PLoS One, 8*(11), 1482–1488.

37. Palmquist, M. (2003). *Relational analysis*. http://writing.colostate.edu/guides/.

38. Fornes, S. L., Rocco, T. S., & Wollard, K. K. (2008). Workplace commitment: A conceptual model. *Journal of European Industrial Training, 32*(6), 452–471.

39. Rothe, P., Sarasoja, A. L., & Heywood, C. (2015). Short-distance corporate relocation: The employee experience. *Facilities, 33*, 38–60. https://doi.org/10.1108/F-05-2013-0037

40. Grosswald, B., & Scharlach, A. E. (1999). Employee experiences with family and medical leave: A case study. *Community, Work & Family, 2*(2), 187–203. https://doi.org/10.1080/13668809908413940

41. Kiefer, T., et al. (2015). Feeling the squeeze: Public employees' experiences of cutback- and innovation-related organizational changes following a national announcement of budget reductions. *Journal of Public Administration Research and Theory, 25*(4), 1279–1305. https://doi.org/10.1093/jopart/muu042

42. Goswami, S., & Ha-Brookshire, J. E. (2016). Exploring U.S. retail employees' experiences of corporate hypocrisy. *Organization Management Journal, 13*(3), 168–178. https://doi.org/10.1080/15416518.2016.1214064

43. Dilani, M., & Pandey, Y. (2022). The impact of organizational rewards on sewing machine operator's job satisfaction: With reference to Seethawaka Board of Investment Sri Lanka. *Management Dynamics*.

44. Jain, E., Shukla, A., Sharma, S. K., & Kumar, A. (2022). Corporate social responsibility influence on organizational performance: Moderating effect of corporate reputation. *Management Dynamics*.

45. Emmett, J., et al. (2020). *COVID-19 and the employee experience: How leaders can seize the moment* (pp. 1–14). McKinsey & Company Organization Practices. https://www.mckinsey.com/business-functions/organization/our-insights/covid-19-and-the-employee-experience-how-leaders-can-seize-the-moment

46. Williams, D. (2021). *Co-governance in digital transformation initiatives: The roles of digital culture and employee experience* (January).

47. Risberg, A. (2001). Employee experiences of acquisition processes. *Journal of World Business, 36*(1), 58–84. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1090-9516(00)00054-7

48. Melton, E. N., & Cunningham, G. B. (2014). Examining the workplace experiences of sport employees who are LGBT: A social categorization theory perspective. *Journal of Sport Management, 28*(1), 21–33. https://doi.org/10.1123/jsm.2011-0157

49. Lesser, E., et al. (2016). *Designing employee experience* (p. 307). IBM Institute for Business Value.

50. Dewey, J. (1958). *Experience and nature*. Dover Publications Inc.

51. Brynjolfsson, E., & McAfee, A. (2011). *Race against the machine: How the digital revolution is accelerating innovation, driving productivity, and irreversibly transforming employment and the economy*. Digital Frontier Press.

52. Gensler. (2013). *2013 U.S. workplace survey: Key findings*. www.gensler.com/uploads/document/337/file/2013_US_Workplace_Survey_07_15_2013.pdf

53. Pérez, A., et al. (2017). Strategically create the employee experience: Redefining the HR operating model. *BMC Public Health, 5*(1), 1–8.

54. Shenoy, V., & Uchil, R. (2018). Influence of cultural environment factors in creating employee experience and its impact on employee engagement: An employee perspective. *International Journal of Business and Information Technology, 11*(2), 18–23.

55. Soni, P., Chawla, A., & Sengar, K. (2017). Job satisfaction: A combination of career growth path, skills and qualifications, job matching, rewards and recognition and job autonomy. *Management Dynamics*.