# Job Satisfaction Among Educators: A Systematic Review

## Abstract

This systematic review of literature examined the emergent scientific literature relating to job satisfaction among educators. It is believed to provide administrators and educational leaders an overall view of educator's job satisfaction and its related factors based on the synthesis and findings of studies across the globe for the past half decade. The findings revealed that empirical studies on job satisfaction among educators mainly focused on self-efficacy and job performance. Thus, there is a need to explore several related factors such as relationship, internal and external factors and theoretical development on job satisfaction. Therefore, it is the researcher's hope that future studies can explore related factors on educator's job satisfaction thereby enriching and augmenting effectiveness and efficiency at work to better guide educational management, supervision and leadership.

**Keywords:** job satisfaction, educators, management and supervision, leadership

## Introduction

### On Teaching

Educators, administrators, researchers, and policy-makers in various countries continue to study the importance of addressing job satisfaction among educators extensively [1-7]. This resulted in considerable volume of research on job satisfaction that has been accumulated in the past decade and emergent literature on this topic started to flourish beginning in 2015 [8]. In addition, more evidence continues to emerge along job satisfaction and other related factors. As the focus of this study, teacher education refers to formal organized professional training engaged in the science and art of teaching. To many, it is assumed to be the foundation and basis for all the other professions. The teaching profession attracts many individuals who want to be an educator, regardless of the level they want to teach in (e.g., kindergarten, elementary, junior and senior high school, college, university, or vocational training). Thus, teaching has become the noblest profession [9].

Job satisfaction is a concern for many organizations not only for educators. It was once enlightened by McGregor [10] in his theory X and theory Y that having great job satisfaction from their work is innate, or they see it as a load, simply working for compensation. This theory has been given importance and is applicable until now. Hence, it will depend on the leader's choice to become authoritarian or a participative leadership style to improve job performance. In the profession of medicine, businesses and engineering and organizations like schools at all levels (elementary, secondary, and tertiary) tend to assess employee's level of satisfaction. Results on identifying their strengths, weaknesses, opportunities and threats anchored on a particular theory and these results are being utilized on what academic leaders can recommend, implement and evaluate training programs and other interventions in order to augment job performance [11]. It is asserted that a greater level of job satisfaction among educators promotes effective teaching and learning [12].

At the outset of this inquiry, several studies so far have sufficiently provided a well-defined relationship between job satisfaction and its related factors. As authors went deeper on this topic, various factors have been linked to educators' effectiveness and efficiency at work, and job satisfaction is one of the frequently studied variables across the world [13-24]. Educators play a prominent role in achieving the ultimate goal of the existence of educational institutions around the world upon whom the triumph or disaster of it will depend on educators. Given its due significance, job satisfaction is a concern. Since plentiful studies about job satisfaction among educators are present in the vast array of literature, there is a need to examine a wide-range of empirical scientific literature and studies concerning educator's job satisfaction and its related factors. This review thereby provides educational leaders accessible summarized findings of job satisfaction important for increasing job satisfaction and job performance. In addition, an update exemplifying upon the recent evidence from the literature needs to be analyzed and therefore identifying the current gaps in the body of knowledge along educators' job satisfaction.

**Table 1**
*Job Satisfaction Definitions from Different Authors*

| Source | Definitions |
| :--- | :--- |
| Locke [25] | "Positive emotional state" |
| Glisson and Durrick [26] | "Positive situation as a consequence of employee's value" |
| Weiss [27] | "Positive or negative evaluative judgment" |
| Armstrong [28]; Davis and Nestrom [29] | "Positive and negative feelings toward work" |
| Hoppock and Spiegler [30] | "Employee's psychological, physiological and environmental aspects" |
| Statt [31] | "A reward, intrinsic in nature" |
| Mullins [32] | "Not equal to intrinsic, not synonymous to motivation" |
| Judge and Thoresen [33] | "An internal state of attitude, qualitative and quantitative, independent or dependent variable" |
| George and Jones [34] | "An attitude not only towards their work, but towards employer, co-employees and salary" |

### On Job Satisfaction

Job satisfaction is one of the most studied variables when it comes to administration and supervision in the organization. In addition, it is one of the concerns in the human behavior within an organization. A number of studies have demonstrated the impact on and from job satisfaction in terms of the different factors it affects towards effectiveness and efficiency in the workplace. In addition, several authors defined job satisfaction in different contexts. Job satisfaction was generally coined by Locke [25], which commonly refers to "a positive emotional state resulting from the appraisal of one's job". According to Glisson and Durrick [26], job satisfaction is the "positive situation as a consequence of an individual's value attributed to his/her work" while Weiss [27] defined it as "a positive (or negative) evaluative judgment one makes about one's job or job situation". Generally, job satisfaction is the reflection of the person's, in this context, the educator's overall attitude towards their overall teaching career [35].

According to Armstrong [28] and Davis and Nestrom [29], it is a combination of positive or negative feelings that employees have towards their work, while Hoppock and Spiegler [30] described it as the combination of the employee's psychological, physiological and environmental aspects. Statt [31] also regarded job satisfaction as a reward and is more attached to an employee's intrinsic motivation. On the other hand, Mullins [32] asserted that it is not equal to intrinsic motivation since job satisfaction is not synonymous to motivation. Rather, it should be an internal state of attitude that can be measured qualitatively and quantitatively and can be either independent or dependent variables based on the researcher's context [33]. Besides, according to George and Jones [34], job satisfaction does not only refer job satisfaction of employee towards the nature of their work, but also they included in their definition factors such as attitude towards employer, co-employees and salary.

In summary, job satisfaction is both a positive and negative internal state of an individual's feeling, both intrinsic and extrinsic in nature whether it is towards work, co-employee and external benefits, can be measured qualitatively and quantitatively, independent or dependent variable.

Table 1 shows some of the most popularly used definitions of job satisfaction.

With the above-mentioned context of job satisfaction, this review was undertaken with the aim to further our understanding of educator's job satisfaction and its related factors. Given the proof that job satisfaction is a widely explored and studied variable, there seems to be a lack of studies about synthesis of educator's job satisfaction and its related factors in the past six years.

In addition, exploration of the widely used models and theories on job satisfaction is also relevant. Therefore, this study believed to provide administrators and educational leaders an overall view of educator's job satisfaction and its related factors based on the synthesis and findings of studies across the globe. Moreover, this study sought the following research questions:

1. What is the nature of the journal literature in terms of the theoretical framework and models used in job satisfaction?
2. What is the nature of the journal literature in terms of educator's job satisfaction and its related factors?

## Methodology

Keyword searches on job satisfaction and its related factors were made through various electronic databases. The electronic databases used to take the relevant studies were original articles from Web of Sciences, DOAJ Database, Google Scholar, Mendeley, Elsevier, Sage Journals, ERIC (Institute of Education Sciences), Researchgate, and Gale Database published from 2015 to 2020. In order to gather the appropriate amount of relevant literature, criteria were, as follows:

(1) article published in a refereed journal,
(2) published between 2015 to 2020,
(3) study focusing on educator's job satisfaction,
(4) study conducted in the basic and higher education, public or private,
(5) using quantitative method or mixed, not pure qualitative, and
(6) the language of publication is English.

In the context of this study, educators would refer to public and private teachers teaching only on basic and higher education. The term "faculty" was also used in identifying relevant literature. Other professions were excluded. The process identified 570 published research papers from all the databases searched. The title, abstracts or full texts of the papers were reviewed before their inclusion in the literature review. Several were deemed not relevant; of poor quality and have utilized vague research design, methodology and data analysis procedures. Further, lists of references of the selected studies were scrutinized to identify earlier critical and essential references. A total of forty-three studies from different regions were found relevant to the present study. These studies were carried out in the following regions: Europe (6): Greece (1), Norway (1), Finland (1), Italy (1), Croatia (1), and Sweden (1); North America (9): Canada (3) and United States (6); Africa (5): Umlazi Region (1), Kenya (1), Tanzania (1), Somalia (1), and Nigeria (1); Asia (20): Indonesia (3), Turkey (3), China (1), Oman (2), Malaysia (1), Pakistan (1), Georgia (1), Iran (2), Israel (1), Philippines (1), Istanbul (1), India (1), and Korea; Australia (2); and one study from both Japan and the US. This study is a systematic review of the scientific literature using thematic and content analysis. The data searching process is presented in Figure 1.

**FIGURE 1**
*Data Search Process*

```
Total number of studies identified on job
satisfaction among educators (n=570)
                |
                v
Total number of studies identified with full-text
availability published in a refereed journal
(n=165)
                |
                v
Total number of studies identified on the period
2015-2020 (n=72)                    Excluded studies, earlier than 2014 (n=93)
                |
                v
Total number of studies assessed for eligibility
(methodology, language used) (n=55)              Excluded studies, purely qualitative and other
                                                           languages (n=17)
                |
                v
Total number of studies included in the review
(n=43)                                             Excluded studies, improper methodology and
                                                           subject of interest (n=12)
```

*Note.* Data search process adapted from Tawfik et al. [36].

## Job Satisfaction: Models and Theories

Job satisfaction is a complex phenomenon. This spawns many theoretical models several decades ago and these theoretical models have been extensively used to explain and guide the numerous and recent inquiries regarding the multifaceted relationships and differences of job satisfaction and other related factors. Several proposed different theories and models on job satisfaction, where most research on educators' job satisfaction are rooted in. The oldest model of job satisfaction mainly focused on the feelings and attitude of an employee has about his job or work. One of the most popular is anchored on Maslow's [37] hierarchy of needs, which attempts to fulfill the needs of the human being. He created five-level hierarchy of needs to be fulfilled by an employee ranging from "physiological needs, safety, belongingness and love, esteem to self-actualization." The latter is the highest, which refers to "becoming everything that one is capable of becoming" [38]. This theory is one of the most used theoretical frameworks in job satisfaction studies. Factors related to job satisfaction utilizing this theory are job motivation, job performance, competence, organizational culture, decision-making styles, organizational commitment and turnover intention [1, 39, 40].

Similarly, McClelland's three needs theory proposed three different needs to be fulfilled. These are "the need for achievement, the need for affiliation, and the need for power." In this theory, the success of an organization relies on two factors, namely managers and employees (human resources), which are dependently related to each other [41]. Leader's decision-making styles is linked to this theory. Since an individual's motivator is on achievement, they are strongly motivated to accomplish the goal. If power is a dominant motivator, leaders control their subordinates [40].

Herzberg's two-factor theory or motivation and hygiene theory distinguished intrinsic and extrinsic aspects of the job. These intrinsic factors contain achievement, advancement, work itself, responsibility, and recognition while the extrinsic factors comprise the institution's policy and administration, technical administration and supervision, working environments, salary, and interpersonal supervision [42]. This theory was the most used theoretical framework on the job satisfaction study of educators found in this review.

According to most studies, some of the factors and variables of job satisfaction related in this theory are job motivation, teacher performance, competence, organizational culture, leaders' decision-making styles, perceptions of retention, teacher's characteristics and demographic profile [1, 2, 39, 40, 43-48].

Looking at Bandura's social cognitive theory, self-efficacy is one of the most important predictors of human motivation. It is defined as the "people's beliefs about their capacities to produce designated levels of performance and exercise influence over events that affect their lives" [49]. Self-efficacy is shaped from four foundations, namely "enactive experience, vicarious experience, verbal persuasion, and interpretation of physiological state." Repeated and fruitful completion of a particular task increases self-efficacy [50].

Looking at previous studies cited, this theory is also strongly linked to burnout, illness and quitting intentions, self-efficacy, working conditions and leader and teacher characteristics [3, 5, 7, 51].

Another theory that has emerged is the three-fold conceptualization of human needs: existence, relatedness, and growth (ERG theory), which was proposed by Alderfer [52]. Unlike Maslow's, human needs provide the basic elements in motivation, which often express individual wants in the form of complex goals, which may include combinations of the basic needs and thus related to job satisfaction [1, 40].

According to Vroom's expectancy theory, motivation is the product of "valence, instrumentality and expectancy", which includes five types of criterion variables: performance, effort, intention, preference, and choice [53]. The reward is remuneration in relation to job satisfaction while the performance is job satisfaction [12]. In addition, expectancy theory challenges the educational institutions, specifically employees, to exhibit more efforts in their work in order to gain more rewards—on salaries and other monetary benefits, though an external force but increases and improves performance and job satisfaction [12, 40].

Leadership also affects educators' job satisfaction. It is positively related to the decisions and the kind of leadership educational leaders are exhibiting. In addition, educators' job satisfaction was found high if leaders displayed participative decision making and transformational leadership. Moreover, educators would have greater satisfaction in their work when they perceive their school leaders as someone who willingly shares and updates information to their subordinates, and at the same time maintains their authority and who is always open to them, that there is no communication barrier between the superior and the subordinate. A high level of teachers' involvement in decision making is related to a high level of job satisfaction [54]. According to Gibson's path-goal theory, a "leader's behavior is contingent to the satisfaction, motivation and performance of their employees." The leaders decide the best path for their employees, and that job performance were influenced by several factors such as the behavior or style of leadership, employee characteristics, and environmental factors [55]. This was empirically shown on the previous studies that a kind of leadership leaders exhibit impacts educators' job satisfaction and organizational commitment [56, 57].

Other theories and models are also relevant to educators' job satisfaction. One is Adam's equity theory, which calls for the balance of employee's inputs (work) and outputs (remuneration) and that job satisfaction is affected by the employee's perception between the pain and the gain they experience in an organization. In addition, this balance also affects organizational behavior and organizational culture [58]. Whereas, looking at Locke's goal setting theory, asserts that goals are the immediate antecedents and controllers of human behavior [59]. Workplace spirituality (WPS) also claims that this theory subsequently activates supportive feelings leading to an overall organizational culture that is determined by level of motivation, represented by a positive reaction, and collaboration among the individuals in the organization, and thus supporting to the organizational excellence as a whole [60]. Psychological capital is also premised on the belief that unlocking concealed potentials and concentrating on their excellence is as important factor to organization. Thus, personal assets and positive qualities of employees are believed to improve employee and organizational performance leading to higher level of job satisfaction [61]. The above-presented theories related to job satisfaction shows that job satisfaction cannot be attributed to only one factor, but also to numerous factors.

Table 2 shows the summary of the research's theoretical basis on educators' job satisfaction.

**Table 2**
*Theoretical Framework on Research on Educators' Job Satisfaction*

| Theories explicitly cited | Key empirical sources |
| :--- | :--- |
| Herzberg's theory | [1, 2, 39, 40, 43-48] |
| Bandura's social learning theory & self-efficacy | [3, 5, 7, 51] |
| Maslow's hierarchy of needs theory | [1, 39, 40] |
| McClelland's needs theory | [40] |
| ERG theory | [1, 40] |
| Leadership theory & organizational commitment | [56, 57] |
| Psychological capital | [62, 63] |
| Workplace spirituality | [64] |
| Path-goal theory | [65] |
| Vroom's expectancy theory | [12, 40] |
| Adam's equity theory | [40] |
| Locke's goal setting theory | [40] |
| *Combination of theories on relevant literature | [4, 6, 13, 15, 16, 18, 19, 21-24, 66-77] |

## Sources of Educators' Job Satisfaction and Other Related Factors

Job satisfaction is one of the most studied variables in the workplace. It was evidenced by many studies, which showed factors that impact job satisfaction. The exploration of these related factors on job satisfaction has the potential to improve the theoretical and conceptual models and framework towards better development of future studies and management interventions. In addition, reviewing these recent studies gives potential to augment effectiveness and efficiency in the workplace.

**Table 3**
*Sources of Educators' Job Satisfaction & Other Related Factors*

| Sources of educators' job satisfaction & other related factors (thematic analysis) | Key empirical sources |
| :--- | :--- |
| Educators' self-efficacy | [3, 5, 7, 19, 22, 51, 68, 70, 77, 78] |
| Administrator's leadership & supervision, support, & decision-making styles | [16, 20, 40, 57, 63, 66, 69, 71, 79] |
| Job performance | [1, 2, 18, 24, 44, 46, 47, 65] |
| Job stress & burn-out | [3, 13, 19, 22, 51, 62, 68] |
| Organizational culture & school climate | [1, 3, 15, 19, 74] |
| Motivation, commitment, & engagement | [1, 4, 39, 56, 68, 70, 74, 75, 80] |
| Salary & other remuneration/compensation | [12, 16, 23, 43] |
| Others (subjective well-being, spirituality, theoretical development, & design) | [19, 62-64, 73] |

Table 3 summarizes the sources of educators' job satisfaction and other related factors analyzed by themes and its key empirical sources.

### Educators' Self-Efficacy

Interestingly, ten studies focused on job satisfaction and self-efficacy [3, 5, 7, 19, 22, 51, 68, 70, 77, 78]. According to Goddard and Goddard [81], educators' self-efficacy is the assessment of one's own competence of an educator. Wang et al. [51] investigated job satisfaction as one of the variables affected by self-efficacy. These variables include burn-out illness and quitting situations along job satisfaction. It was hypothesized that educators with high levels of self-efficacy were expected to have lower levels of burnout and illness symptoms and thus results in higher job satisfaction. Also, results from the study displayed that the higher teacher's self-efficacy, the higher job satisfaction. Similarly, results of the study of Katz [19] showed the implementation of the researcher's model namely three block models of universal design for learning (TBM-UDL), which also supports teacher retention, self-efficacy, and job satisfaction. This model believed to improve job satisfaction and higher levels of teacher's self-efficacy. Another study supported self-efficacy and job satisfaction that educators' self-efficacy and job satisfaction were both linked to school environment. According to Aldridge and Fraser [3], there is a significant relationship between teacher's self-efficacy and job satisfaction. Likewise, Malinen and Savolainen [22] also revealed that school environment positively affects job satisfaction and self-efficacy.

Moreover, Von der Embse et al. [77] also examined the complex relationship between teacher self-efficacy, teacher stress, and job satisfaction. Results indicated a significant effect of self-efficacy in student engagement and self-efficacy in classroom management on the relationship between sources of stress and job satisfaction. The findings also highlight the importance of supporting teacher self-efficacy to reduce stress and, thus, increasing job satisfaction. Turkoglu et al. [70] investigated the relationship between self-efficacy beliefs and job satisfaction of educators. Similarly, the results revealed a noteworthy positive relationship between self-efficacy beliefs and job satisfaction. In other words, the variable, which is self-efficacy beliefs, was found to be a significant predictor of job satisfaction.

Underpinning job satisfaction and self-efficacy, teacher's demographic profile conducted by Perera et al. [68] was also found relevant. Results revealed that the dimensions of teacher self-efficacy, work engagement, and job satisfaction varied across the demographic profiles. The findings provide new evidence suggesting that teacher attrition, effectiveness, or selection, models should consider trait interactions rather than only additive effects of personality. Using a mixed methods approach conducted by Ismayilova and Klassen [5] results teaching self-efficacy was found higher than research self-efficacy, and that levels of research self-efficacy vary to career stages and educational qualifications. However, no significant differences was found between gender and self-efficacy. In support to this, job satisfaction was found highest among educators with the highest educational attainment. Moreover, result of the study confirmed that self-efficacy is one of the strongest predictors of job satisfaction.

Burić and Moè [78] surveyed the interrelations of motivational (teacher self-efficacy), affective (positive emotions), and well-being factors (job satisfaction) in determining teachers' self-efficacy. Results established that positive affect was related to enthusiasm both directly and indirectly via self-efficacy and job satisfaction. Relatively, Toropova et al. [7] also demonstrated an association between schoolworking conditions and teacher job satisfaction. More specifically, teacher workload, teacher cooperation and teacher perceptions of student discipline in school were the factors most closely related to teacher job satisfaction and thus increasing self-efficacy.

The findings of the aforementioned studies show that educators' self-efficacy predicts job satisfaction. In this regard, it can be argued that a high level of self-efficacy could result in high level of job satisfaction. Hence, administrators and supervisors should assure that educators view themselves as competent in their functions and roles.

### Impact of Leadership and Decision-Making Styles

Eight studies reported the impact of leadership and decision making styles of school leaders on job satisfaction [16, 20, 40, 57, 63, 66, 69, 71, 79].

The primary function of school leaders is to serve both the institution and the society as a whole and the concept of leadership suggests a unique viewpoint to job satisfaction [66]. School leaders' decisions can give positive or negative impacts on organizations and, thus, decision-making is crucial as it also affects educators' job satisfaction [40]. This claim was also supported to the findings in the study of Olcum and Titrek [40] that the use of effective decision-making styles by school leaders in the decision-making process increases educators' job satisfaction. Pan et al. [63] discovered that turnover intensions, job stress and educators with chronic diseases had a significantly negative impact on job satisfaction. Nevertheless, perceptions on the organization's support to the employee were found positive among educators' job satisfaction. Song and Alpaslan [71] likewise indicated the need for emotional support from mentors, administrators and community related to their concerns and challenges in increasing teacher's job satisfaction in the workplace. Al-Mahdy et al. [66] also contributed that servant leadership, among other leadership styles, and job satisfaction was significantly related. Results showed that educators indicated reasonable levels of job satisfaction and servant leadership of school leaders. Green and Muñoz [16] addressed the problem of job satisfaction along with the new teachers. The study found that overall new teacher job satisfaction correlates with (a) preparedness, (b) leadership, (c) independence, (d) time, and (e) benefits.

Nyenyembe et al. [20] also explored the relationship between leadership styles applied by school heads and teachers' job satisfaction. The most salient finding of this study revealed that teachers were more satisfied with their job when their school leaders mentor them and paying attentively to their personal well-being. Contrary to the standard leadership, the study suggests that transactional and transformational leadership increases job satisfaction among educators. It was also supported on the study by Sayadi [57], where it was found out that transactional and transformational leadership is positively related to the administrator's effectiveness and efficiency at work, the subordinate's effort and organizational commitment and job satisfaction, as well. Suchyadi [79] examined educators' job satisfaction vis a vis supervision of the school leader. This study yields the main conclusion that there is a positive relationship between supervision of the school leader and teacher job satisfaction, meaning that the higher the supervision of the school leader, the higher the educators' job satisfaction. In addition, the effect between job satisfaction and principal's support is statistically significant emphasizing the need to maintain professional communities, where teachers can cooperate and work together with the support of their school leaders [69]. The findings of the previous studies demonstrated that leadership and decision-making styles affect the job satisfaction of educators. But, there is inconsistency on the kind of leadership style and decision-making style a leader should possess in the reported literature.

### Relationship of Job Satisfaction and Job Performance

Job performance and job satisfaction were also correlated by eight studies [1, 2, 18, 24, 44, 46, 47, 65]. According to Colquitt et al. [82], job satisfaction refers to "the value of the set of employee behaviors that contribute either positively or negatively to organizational goal accomplishment." This goal accomplishment is the job performance and is measured by different evaluation instruments. For example, framework for evaluation and professional growth in Tennessee was utilized by Koedel et al. [44] while individual performance commitment and review form in Philippines was used in the study of Baluyos et al. [2].

Arifin [1] found the effect of educators' competency, motivation, and organizational competence to job satisfaction and job performance. The results of this study by Riyadi [65] provided some information that job satisfaction of teachers were affected by teachers' work motivation, work stress and work motivation. Sheikh Ali et al. [46] determined the significant relationship between teacher motivation and school performance, the mediating effect of teacher's job satisfaction. These studies found that there is a significant relationship between teacher motivation, job satisfaction and school performance. Soodmand Afshar and Doosti [47] investigated significant differences between educators who are satisfied and dissatisfied in terms of their job performance, as rated by educators themselves and their students. The result indicated that dissatisfied educators differed their job performance and job satisfaction to satisfied educators. The results also showed significant differences in educators' job performance when rated by their students and by educators themselves. Similarly, Koedel et al. [44] offered the first causal proof on the relationship between performance ratings and teacher's job satisfaction.

Kadtong et al. [18] explored the relationship between educators' job performance and job satisfaction. The findings of the study revealed that teachers were contented with the different facets of job satisfaction identified in study such as school policy, supervision and administration, interpersonal relations, working environment, the work itself, achievements, opportunities for professional growth and development, recognition and teacher responsibility. Similar study was also carried out by Baluyos et al. [2]. The findings suggested that schools have to be provided with the faculty lounge so teachers can talk freely about their well-being and human resource management officers have to include in their teacher retention strategies, as teacher retention is also a variable that affects job satisfaction. In support, Taiwo et al. [24] examined job satisfaction as correlate of teacher job's performance, which revealed that the level of job satisfaction of teachers were significantly low, contrary to other results. Looking at these results, it is recommended that government should ensure good salary training programs, smooth working relationship and a good working environment in order to improve job performance and job satisfaction.

### Job Stress and Burn-Out

Seven studies also investigated job stress and burn-out in relation to educators' job satisfaction [3, 13, 19, 22, 51, 62, 65, 68, 77]. Collie et al. [13] identified three SEL (social-emotional learning) belief profiles of teachers, which indicated that the teachers have differential levels of comfort and perceived support for SEL. Importantly, these differences are linked with teacher outcomes (stress and satisfaction) known to impact teaching effectiveness, job satisfaction and student outcomes. The findings of the study of Hansen et al. [62] indicated a statistically significant relationships between job satisfaction, subjective well-being, psychological capital and burn-out. Psychological capital was found to mediate with the relationship between burnout and subjective well-being. It is therefore recommended that institutions can help diminish burnout among educators through the enhancement of positive ability essential in psychological capital and sustaining potential of educators' subjective well-being. In addition, teachers of different ages or at different professional stages reported the same sources of job satisfaction and stress. However, coping strategies and concerns differed with age among the teacher respondents [68]. Some of the previous studies discussed also explored job stress and burn-out in relation to job satisfaction [3, 22, 51, 65, 77].

### Organizational Culture and School Climate

Five studies also aimed at analyzing the relationship of organizational culture and school climate vis a vis job satisfaction [1, 3, 15, 19, 74]. An integrative model was examined by Shoshani and Eldor [74] and found out that educator-learning environment is related to educators' sense of job engagement, subjective well-being and job satisfaction as mediator. Likewise, research emphasized that learning environment and job satisfaction impact student's school engagement, thereby giving further validity to the importance in the educational system. Ghavifekr and Pillai [15] indicated that there is a significant positive relationship between school organizational climate and teachers' job satisfaction. The findings in the aforementioned study were found that teachers are fairly satisfied with their job, with the responsibility factor as the biggest contributory factor to job satisfaction. Along with this, organizational culture was also explored by previous studies [1, 3, 22].

### Motivation, Organizational Commitment, and Engagement

Along with motivation, organizational commitment and engagement, 10 studies were also deemed relevant [1, 4, 39, 56, 68, 70, 74, 75, 80]. Garbyal and Kaur [43] revealed that majority of the educators had medium level of job satisfaction. It was also found that "freedom of expression" was an important dimension of intrinsic (motivation) factor, as compared to "recognition and reward" while others were more satisfied with 'social status attached to job' than 'adequacy of salary' under extrinsic (hygiene) factor. Also, Demirtas [56] developed a model in which job satisfaction causes organizational commitment and vice versa. Also, model tests mutual relationship of job satisfaction and organizational commitment. In addition, the model shows that job satisfaction and organizational commitment mutually affect each other. Likewise, Larkin et al. [39] explored factors influencing teacher job satisfaction, turnover intentions, and organizational commitment. Results also revealed that educators have a moderately high level of job satisfaction, which correlated to job commitment and their intent to remain in their profession in the online setting considering the short-term and long-term future. Mertler [80] attempted to describe the present status of teacher motivation, job satisfaction, and retention. Results included an overall job satisfaction level of 74%, and several significant job satisfaction differences among teacher's demographic profile. Also, similar variables were examined in previously discussed studies [1, 46, 65, 68, 70, 71, 74].

### Compensation

Compensation is one of the factors that motivate employees at work and thus improving job satisfaction. However, only three recent studies confirmed that job satisfaction is related to compensation [12, 16, 23, 43]. It can be argued that if educators are remunerated well, they will be invigorated, guaranteed, secured and will have positive feelings towards their work. This would result in a higher level of job satisfaction [12]. As found in the study of Saiti and Papadopoulos [23], educators are generally satisfied with their profession in three aspects namely administration, colleagues and nature of work but not with salary, benefits and potential rewards. Thus, compensation is also an important variable to increase job satisfaction, which was also given importance in the previously cited study [23, 43].

### Others (Subjective Well-Being & Spirituality)

Five studies further explored factors such as subjective well-being, spirituality and theoretical development of job satisfaction [19, 62-64, 73]. The results of the study of Hassan et al. [64] showed that WPS is positively correlated with trust and trust significantly mediates WPS on job satisfaction. Thus, new dimensions to WPS were recommended. Similarly, findings of the study of Agha et al. [73] also revealed that work interference with personal life and vice versa had a negative relationship with job satisfaction. Enhancement of this factor led to a positive relationship with job satisfaction. Thus, it is concluded that work and personal life needs to be integrated and balanced by organizations through work-life balance initiatives. Collaboration between students, co-faculty members and stakeholders also affects the work satisfaction. Reeves et al. [72] examined how the effects of collaboration differ according to both the type and frequency of collaborative activity. In the study of Crisci et al. [2], the following six major factors affecting teacher satisfaction were identified: communication, involvement, leadership, school climate, structure and job satisfaction. Likewise, Moon [76] job satisfaction and satisfaction of overall life among kindergarten teachers. Result of the study indicated higher levels of job satisfaction among different factors identified in the study such as development, autonomy, consciousness, fellowship, innovation and reward. Previously discussed studies also used this as a factor [19, 62, 63, 74].

In summary, job satisfaction of educators is widely explored at present. We can observe that from the forty-three studies reviewed, some of the themes were found to overlap from each other. Hence these factors related to educators' job satisfaction impact effectiveness and efficiency. Although, some reported studies differed on the explored factors regarding job satisfaction, studies reviewed revealed that the sources of job satisfaction among teachers are comparable. These are teacher's self-efficacy, administrator's leadership and supervision, support and decision-making styles, job performance, job stress and burn-out, organizational culture and school climate, motivation, commitment and engagement, salary and other remuneration/compensation and others (subjective well-being, spirituality, theoretical development and design). It is revealed that job satisfaction is linked with the previously discussed related factors.

## Conclusions

This systematic review contributes to the body of knowledge regarding educators' job satisfaction through identifying its related factors and substantiating several theoretical models on job satisfaction. Job satisfaction is essential to be explored by educators, administrators, researchers, and policy-makers. Along with its definition, it is both a positive and negative internal state of feeling of an individual, intrinsic and extrinsic in nature whether it is towards work, co-employee and external benefits and can be measured qualitatively and quantitatively, independently and dependently. Though there are salient, and numerous theories concerning job satisfaction among educators, theories and models like Herzberg's theory, Bandura's social learning theory and self-efficacy and Maslow's hierarchy of needs is the most widely used model. In addition, several studies had combined several theories and models and created their conceptual framework and models based on the related literature and studies. With regards to job satisfaction and its related factors, variables were identified, namely educators' self-efficacy, administrator's leadership and supervision, support and decision-making styles, job performance, job stress and burn-out, organizational culture and school climate, motivation, commitment and engagement, salary and other remuneration/compensation and others (subjective well-being, spirituality, theoretical development and design).

Nonetheless, there is a wide-range of empirical studies conducted on educators' job satisfaction, there are still much research needs to be done in this area. From its definition, there has been no clear meaning of job satisfaction. In addition, there are still a wide range of emerging theories and models about it. Besides, empirical studies on job satisfaction among educators mainly focused on self-efficacy and job performance. Thus, there is a need to explore several related factors such as relationship, internal and external factors and theoretical development on job satisfaction. Therefore, it is the researcher's hope that future studies can explore related factors on educators' job satisfaction, and therefore enriching and augmenting effectiveness and efficiency at work to better guide educational management, supervision and leadership.

### Limitations

This paper examined a literature review of job satisfaction among educators only, but this review does not capture all the studies in the said area because of its limited time and resources. First, this review captured only some studies published from 2015-2020 in peer-reviewed scientific journals mainly viewed online. Second, there are too many research findings about the definitions, theoretical basis, related factors and variables of job satisfaction, this paper only reviewed some of them according to the author's inclination, which will unavoidably lead to bias and incompleteness of the review of job satisfaction. Third, job satisfaction in this review is viewed quantitatively as a variable, both dependent and independent and thus not in social context or purely qualitative, which may lead to different issues from different countries. Finally, the review only highlights job satisfaction, in general, and its related factors and will require further reviews in the future.

## References

1. Arifin, H. (2015). The influence of competence, motivation, and organizational culture to high school teacher job satisfaction and performance. *International Education Studies*, *8*, 38–45. https://doi.org/10.5539/ies.v8n1p38

2. Baluyos, G. R., Rivera, H. L., & Baluyos, E. L. (2019). Teachers' job satisfaction and work performance. *Open Journal of Social Sciences*, *7*, 206–221. https://doi.org/10.4236/jss.2019.78015

3. Aldridge, J. M., & Fraser, B. J. (2016). Teachers' views of their school climate and its relationship with teacher self-efficacy and job satisfaction. *Learning Environments Research*, *19*(2), 291–307. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10984-015-9198-x

4. Crisci, A., Sepe, E., & Malafronte, P. (2019). What influences teachers' job satisfaction and how to improve, develop and reorganize the school activities associated with them. *Quality & Quantity*, *53*(5), 2403–2419. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11135-018-0749-y

5. Ismayilova, K., & Klassen, R. M. (2019). Research and teaching self-efficacy of university faculty: Relations with job satisfaction. *International Journal of Educational Research*, *98*, 55–66. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijer.2019.08.012

6. Kadtong, M. L., Unos, M. A., Antok, T. D., & Midzid, M. A. E. (2017). Teaching performance and job satisfaction among teachers at Region XII. *Proceedings Journal of Education, Psychology and Social Science Research*, *4*(1), 113. https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3169846

7. Toropova, A., Myrberg, E., & Johansson, S. (2020). Teacher job satisfaction: The importance of schoolworking conditions and teacher characteristics. *Educational Review*, *73*(1), 71–97. https://doi.org/10.1080/00131911.2019.1705247

8. Cansoy, R. (2019). The relationship between school principals' leadership behaviors and teachers' job satisfaction: A systematic review. *International Education Studies*, *12*(1), 37–52. https://doi.org/10.5539/ies.v12n1p37

9. Angelista, J. L. (2018). Teaching as a noble work: Why people join the teaching profession? A case study of undergraduate students in education program at Mwenge Catholic University in Tanzania. *International Journal of Contemporary Applied Researches*, *5*(9), 1–22.

10. McGregor, D. M. (1960). *The human side of enterprise*. McGraw Hill.

11. Viswesvaran, C., & Ones, D. S. (2000). Perspectives on models of job performance. *International Journal of Selection and Assessment*, *8*(4), 216–226. https://doi.org/10.1111/1468-2389.00151

12. Muguongo, M. (2015). Effects of compensation on job satisfaction among secondary school teachers in Maara Sub-County of Tharaka Nithi County, Kenya. *Journal of Human Resource Management*, *3*(6), 47. https://doi.org/10.11648/j.jhrm.20150306.11

13. Collie, R., Shapka, J., Perry, N., & Martin, A. (2015). Teachers' beliefs about social-emotional learning: Identifying teacher profiles and their relations with job stress and satisfaction. *Learning and Instruction*, *39*, 148–157. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.learninstruc.2015.06.002

14. Demirtas, Z. (2015). The relationship between job satisfaction and organizational commitment: A study on elementary schools. *Kastamonu Eğitim Dergisi*, *23*(1), 253–268.

15. Ghavifekr, S., & Pillai, N. S. (2016). The relationship between school's organizational climate and teacher's job satisfaction: Malaysian experience. *Asia Pacific Education Review*, *17*(1), 87–106. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12564-015-9411-8

16. Green, A. M., & Muñoz, M. A. (2016). Predictors of new teacher satisfaction in urban schools: Effects of personal characteristics, general job facets, and teacher-specific job facets. *Journal of School Leadership*, *26*(1), 92–123. https://doi.org/10.1177/105268461602600104

17. Katz, J. (2015). Implementing the three block model of universal design for learning: Effects on teachers' self-efficacy, stress, and job satisfaction in inclusive classrooms K-12. *International Journal of Inclusive Education*, *19*(1), 1–20. https://doi.org/10.1080/13603116.2014.881569

18. Kadtong, M. L., Unos, M. A., Antok, T. D., & Midzid, M. A. E. (2017). Teaching performance and job satisfaction among teachers at Region XII. *Proceedings Journal of Education, Psychology and Social Science Research*, *4*(1), 113. https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3169846

19. Katz, J. (2015). Implementing the three block model of universal design for learning: Effects on teachers' self-efficacy, stress, and job satisfaction in inclusive classrooms K-12. *International Journal of Inclusive Education*, *19*(1), 1–20. https://doi.org/10.1080/13603116.2014.881569

20. Nyenyembe, F., Maslowski, R., Nimrod, B., & Peter, L. (2016). Leadership styles and teachers' job satisfaction in Tanzanian public secondary schools. *Universal Journal of Educational Research*, *4*, 980–988. https://doi.org/10.13189/ujer.2016.040507

21. Malinen, O.-P., & Savolainen, H. (2016). The effect of perceived school climate and teacher efficacy in behavior management on job satisfaction and burnout: A longitudinal study. *Teaching and Teacher Education*, *60*, 144–152. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tate.2016.08.012

22. Malinen, O.-P., & Savolainen, H. (2016). The effect of perceived school climate and teacher efficacy in behavior management on job satisfaction and burnout: A longitudinal study. *Teaching and Teacher Education*, *60*, 144–152. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tate.2016.08.012

23. Saiti, A., & Papadopoulos, Y. (2015). School teachers' job satisfaction and personal characteristics: A quantitative research study in Greece. *International Journal of Educational Management*, *29*(1), 73–97. https://doi.org/10.1108/IJEM-05-2013-0081

24. Taiwo, O. O., Eyarefe, I. D., & Olawale, S. S. (2019). Job satisfaction as a correlate of teachers' job performance in public secondary schools in Osun State. *Educational Research International*, *8*(3), 81–89.

25. Locke, E. A. (1976). *The nature and causes of job satisfaction*. Rand McNally.

26. Glisson, C., & Durrick, M. (1988). Predictors of job satisfaction and organizational commitment in human service organizations. *Administrative Science Quarterly*, *33*(1), 61–81. https://doi.org/10.2307/2392855

27. Weiss, H. (2002). Deconstructing job satisfaction: Separating evaluations, beliefs and affective experiences. *Human Resource Management Review*, *12*, 173–194. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1053-4822(02)00045-1

28. Armstrong, M. (2006). *A handbook of human resource management practice*. Kogan Page Publishing.

29. Davis, K., & Nestrom, J. W. (1985). *Human behavior at work: Organizational behavior*. McGraw Hill.

30. Hoppock, R., & Spiegler, S. (1938). Job satisfaction. *Occupations: The Vocational Guidance Journal*, *16*(7), 636–643. https://doi.org/10.1002/j.2164-5892.1938.tb00348.x

31. Statt, D. (2004). *The Routledge dictionary of business management*. Routledge. https://doi.org/10.4324/9780203362051

32. Mullins, J. L. (2005). *Management and organizational behavior*. Pearson.

33. Judge, T. A., & Thoresen, C. J. (2001). The job satisfaction-job performance relationship: A qualitative and quantitative review. *Psychological Bulletin*, *127*(3), 376–407. https://doi.org/10.1037/0033-2909.127.3.376

34. George, J. M., & Jones, G. R. (2008). *Understanding and managing organizational behavior*. Prentice Hall.

35. Robins, S. P. (2001). *Organizational behavior*. Prentice Hall.

36. Tawfik, G. M., Dila, K. A. S., Mohamed, M. Y. F., Tam, D. N. H., Kien, N. D., Ahmed, A. M., & Huy, N. T. (2019). A step-by-step guide for conducting a systematic review and meta-analysis with simulation data. *Tropical Medicine and Health*, *47*(1), 46. https://doi.org/10.1186/s41182-019-0165-6

37. Maslow, A. H. (1954). *Motivation and personality*. Harpers.

38. Hütt, W. (2007). Maslow's hierarchy of needs. *Educational psychology interactive*. Valdosta State University.

39. Larkin, I., Brantley-Dias, L., & Lokey-Vega, A. (2016). Job satisfaction, organizational commitment, and turnover intention of online teachers in the K-12 setting. *Online Learning*, *20*(3), 26–51. https://doi.org/10.24059/olj.v20i3.986

40. Olcum, D., & Titrek, O. (2015). The effect of school administrators' decision-making styles on teacher job satisfaction. *Procedia-Social and Behavioral Sciences*, *197*, 1936–1946. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sbspro.2015.07.575

41. Arnolds, C. A., & Boshoff, C. (2003). The influence of McClelland's need satisfaction theory on employee job performance. *Journal of African Business*, *4*(3), 55–81. https://doi.org/10.1300/J156v04n03_04

42. Herzberg, F., Mausner, B., & Synderman, B. (1959). *The motivation to work*. Wiley.

43. Garbyal, S., & Kaur, S. (2019). A study on job satisfaction of government schoolteachers. *Journal of Social Sciences*, *59*(1-3), 28–35. https://doi.org/10.31901/24566756.2019/59.1-3.2239

44. Koedel, C., Li, J., Springer, M. G., & Tan, L. (2017). The impact of performance ratings on job satisfaction for public school teachers. *American Educational Research Journal*, *54*(2), 241–278. https://doi.org/10.3102/0002831216687531

45. Mertler, C. (2016). Should I stay or should I go? Understanding teacher motivation, job satisfaction, and perceptions of retention among Arizona teachers. *International Research in Higher Education*, *1*(2), 34–45. https://doi.org/10.5430/irhe.v1n2p34

46. Sheikh Ali, A., Dahie, A., & Ali, A. (2016). Teacher motivation and school performance, the mediating effect of job satisfaction: Survey from secondary schools in Mogadishu. *International Journal of Education and Social Science*, *3*, 24–38.

47. Soodmand Afshar, H., & Doosti, M. (2016). Investigating the impact of job satisfaction/dissatisfaction on Iranian English teachers' job performance. *Iranian Journal of Language Teaching Research*, *4*, 97–115.

48. Crisci, A., Sepe, E., & Malafronte, P. (2019). What influences teachers' job satisfaction and how to improve, develop and reorganize the school activities associated with them. *Quality & Quantity*, *53*(5), 2403–2419. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11135-018-0749-y

49. Bandura, A. (1994). Regulative function of perceived self-efficacy. In M. G. Rumsey, C. B. Walker, & J. H. Harris (Eds.), *Personnel selection and classification* (pp. 261–271). Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.

50. Bandura, A. (1997). *Self-efficacy: The exercise of control*. W. H. Freeman/Times Books/ Henry Holt & Co.

51. Wang, H., Hall, N. C., & Rahimi, S. (2015). Self-efficacy and causal attributions in teachers: Effects on burnout, job satisfaction, illness, and quitting intentions. *Teaching and Teacher Education*, *47*, 120–130. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tate.2014.12.005

52. Alderfer, C. P. (1969). An empirical test of a new theory of human needs. *Organizational Behavior and Human Performance*, *4*(2), 142–175. https://doi.org/10.1016/0030-5073(69)90004-X

53. Van Eerde, W., & Thierry, H. (1996). Vroom's expectancy models and work-related criteria: A meta-analysis. *Journal of Applied Psychology*, *81*, 575–586. https://doi.org/10.1037/0021-9010.81.5.575

54. Bogler, R. (2001). The influence of leadership style on teacher job satisfaction. *Educational Administration Quarterly*, *37*(5), 662–683. https://doi.org/10.1177/00131610121969460

55. Gibson, J. L., Ivancevich, J. M., Donnelly Jr., J. H., & Konopaske, R. (2012). *Organization: Behavior structure processes*. McGrawHill.

56. Demirtas, Z. (2015). The relationship between job satisfaction and organizational commitment: A study on elementary schools. *Kastamonu Eğitim Dergisi*, *23*(1), 253–268.

57. Sayadi, Y. (2016). The effect of dimensions of transformational, transactional, and non-leadership on the job satisfaction and organizational commitment of teachers in Iran. *Management in Education*, *30*(2), 57–65. https://doi.org/10.1177/0892020615625363

58. Cook, K., & Parcel, T. L. (1977). Equity theory: Directions for future research. *Sociological Inquiry*, *47*, 75–88. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1475-682X.1977.tb00781.x

59. Locke, E. A., & Latham, G. P. (2002). Building a practically useful theory of goal setting and task motivation: A 35-year odyssey. *American Psychologist*, *57*(9), 705–717. https://doi.org/10.1037/0003-066X.57.9.705

60. Afsar, B., & Rehman, M. (2016). The relationship between workplace spirituality and innovative work behavior: The mediating role of perceived person-organization fit. *Journal of Management, Spirituality & Religion*, *12*(4), 329-353. https://doi.org/10.1080/14766086.2015.1060515

61. Luthans, F., Luthans, K. W., & Luthans, B. C. (2004). Positive psychological capital: Beyond human and social capital. *Business Horizons*, *47*(1), 45–50. http://digitalcommons.unl.edu/manage/mentfacpub/145

62. Hansen, A., Buitendach, J., & Kanengoni, H. (2015). Psychological capital, subjective well-being, burnout and job satisfaction amongst educators in the Umlazi Region in South Africa. *SA Journal of Human Resource Management*, *13*, 1–9. https://doi.org/10.4102/sajhrm.v13i1.621

63. Pan, B., Shen, X., Liu, L., Yang, Y., & Wang, L. (2015). Factors associated with job satisfaction among university teachers in Northeastern Region of China: A cross-sectional study. *International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health*, *12*(10), 12761–12775. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph121012761

64. Hassan, M., Bin Nadeem, A., & Akhter, A. (2016). Impact of workplace spirituality on job satisfaction: Mediating effect of trust. *Cogent Business & Management*, *3*(1), 1189808. https://doi.org/10.1080/23311975.2016.1189808

65. Riyadi, S. (2015). Effect of work motivation, work stress and job satisfaction on teacher performance at senior high school (SMA) throughout the State Central Tapanuli, Sumatera. *IOSR Journal of Humanities and Social Science*, *20*(2), 52–57.

66. Al-Mahdy, Y. F. H., Al-Harthi, A. S., & Salah El-Din, N. S. (2016). Perceptions of school principals' servant leadership and their teachers' job satisfaction in Oman. *Leadership and Policy in Schools*, *15*(4), 543–566. https://doi.org/10.1080/15700763.2015.1047032

67. Burić, I., & Moè, A. (2020). What makes teachers enthusiastic: The interplay of positive affect, self-efficacy and job satisfaction? *Teaching and Teacher Education*, *89*, 103008. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tate.2019.103008

68. Perera, H. N., Granziera, H., & McIlveen, P. (2018). Profiles of teacher personality and relations with teacher self-efficacy, work engagement, and job satisfaction. *Personality and Individual Differences*, *120*, 171–178. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.paid.2017.08.034

69. Olsen, A., & Huang, F. (2019). Teacher job satisfaction by principal support and teacher cooperation: Results from the schools and staffing survey. *Education Policy Analysis Archives*, *27*, 11. https://doi.org/10.14507/epaa.27.4174

70. Turkoglu, M. E., Cansoy, R., & Parlar, H. (2017). Examining relationship between teachers' self-efficacy and job satisfaction. *Universal Journal of Educational Research*, *5*(5), 765–772. https://doi.org/10.13189/ujer.2017.050509

71. Song, S., & Alpaslan, M. M. (2015). Factors impacting on teachers' job satisfaction related to science teaching: A mixed methods study. *Science Education International*, *26*, 358–375.

72. Reeves, P. M., Pun, W. H., & Chung, K. S. (2017). Influence of teacher collaboration on job satisfaction and student achievement. *Teaching and Teacher Education*, *67*, 227–236. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tate.2017.06.016

73. Agha, K., Azmi, T., & Irfan, A. (2017). Work-life balance and job satisfaction: An empirical study focusing on higher education teachers in Oman. *International Journal of Social Science and Humanity*, *7*(3), 164–171. https://doi.org/10.18178/ijssh.2017.V7.813

74. Shoshani, A., & Eldor, L. (2016). The informal learning of teachers: Learning climate, job satisfaction and teachers' and students' motivation and well-being. *International Journal of Educational Research*, *79*, 52–63. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijer.2016.06.007

75. Skaalvik, E., & Skaalvik, S. (2015). Job satisfaction, stress and coping strategies in the teaching profession—What do teachers say? *International Education Studies*, *8*(3), 181–192. https://doi.org/10.5539/ies.v8n3p181

76. Moon, M.-H. (2020). The effects of kindergarten teachers' job satisfaction and their life satisfaction on teacher-children interactions. *Journal of Convergence for Information Technology*, *10*(3), 126–133. https://doi.org/10.22156/CS4SMB.2020.10.03.126

77. Von der Embse, N., Sandilos, L., Pendergast, L., & Mankin, A. (2016). Teacher stress, teaching-efficacy, and job satisfaction in response to test-based educational accountability policies. *Learning and Individual Differences*, *50*, 308–317. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lindif.2016.08.001

78. Burić, I., & Moè, A. (2020). What makes teachers enthusiastic: The interplay of positive affect, self-efficacy and job satisfaction? *Teaching and Teacher Education*, *89*, 103008. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tate.2019.103008

79. Suchyadi, Y. (2018). Relationship between principal supervision in increasing the job satisfaction of private junior high school teachers in East Bogor District. *Journal of Humanities and Social Studies*, *2*(1), 26–29. https://doi.org/10.33751/jhss.v2i1.818

80. Mertler, C. (2016). Should I stay or should I go? Understanding teacher motivation, job satisfaction, and perceptions of retention among Arizona teachers. *International Research in Higher Education*, *1*(2), 34–45. https://doi.org/10.5430/irhe.v1n2p34

81. Goddard, R. D., & Goddard, Y. L. (2001) A multilevel analysis of the relationship between teacher and collective efficacy in Urban Schools. *Teaching and Teacher Education*, *17*, 807–818. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0742-051X(01)00032-4

82. Colquitt, J, Le-Pine, J, & Wesson, M. (2009). *Organizational behavior: Improving performance and commitment in the workplace*. McGraw-Hill.