# Augmented Reality Applications for Mathematical Creativity: A Systematic Review

## Abstract

Augmented reality (AR) applications are often studied in education. However, little literature has systematically reviewed the applications of AR for mathematical creativity. This paper aims to analyze the research trends comprehensively and systematically on 66 articles from 2015 to 2023. Based on the NCTM Principles and Standards guidelines, trends in the application of AR in mathematics education can be analyzed into six themes: equity, mathematics curriculum, mathematics teaching, learning, assessment, and mathematics technology. The results of the study show that (1) AR for mathematical creativity has implications for improving students' cognitive performance; problem-solving process; self-potential; social skills, and self-ability of students; (2) the most dominant features in developing AR applications for mathematical creativity are the Unity3D tool and Vuforia; (3) AR has a positive impact on equity for improving the quality of teaching and learning, supporting the educational curriculum; improve the teaching and learning of mathematics; effective evaluation and technology development in the learning process; (4) AR as a creative learning media; AR helps creative collaboration between students; and able to improve students' creative thinking skills. The results of a systematic review of AR applications for mathematical creativity can help educators and the development of future educational research.

**Keywords** Augmented reality application · Mathematical creativity · Mathematics education · Systematic review · Literature review

## Introduction

Augmented reality (AR) applications are the best interactive technology to enhance mathematical creativity. AR applications integrate models, processes, animations, and simulations so students' interactions and intuition appear active [1]. In addition, AR is a technology that supports student interaction to bring out student creativity [2]. The application of AR in creativity can positively impact student learning outcomes [3,4]. This is because AR technology combines physical objects with digital visualization through research and development of design prototypes [5]. Development of AR applications to visualize space designs into reality [6]. Therefore, the development of AR applications must be based on an analysis of the needs and experiences of developers and researchers so that the AR applications created can improve learning and educational outcomes.

The target of implementing AR applications for mathematical creativity is very much needed in education. AR applications are a technological advance that uses tablets, cell phones, GPS, built-in cameras, and internet access to support independent creativity in education [7]. Technology from digital AR applications can represent abstract educational concepts to improve students' understanding and creativity [8]. In terms of systems, AR applications combine physical objects related to abstract mathematical concepts, the natural environment, and student creativity [5,9–12]. AR generally affects the acquisition of mathematical knowledge [7]. AR application is an efficient digital technology tool for mathematics learning [8]. AR applications use visualization skills to enhance mathematics learning [11]. The application of AR impacts learning outcomes, which are responses, creativity, knowledge, skills, and student performance [13]. Thus, integrating knowledge, mathematical creativity, mathematics education, and AR technology effectively improves the quality of mathematics learning [11]. This shows that AR applications receive special attention in mathematical creativity for future educational development.

The importance of applying AR for mathematical creativity and education in the future, this study will analyze the literature review on the use of AR for mathematical creativity, namely the implications, features, potential, perceptions, user criteria, measurement tools, and evaluation methods of using AR for mathematical creativity. This limited information can hinder the development of AR in future research. Therefore, this study fills this gap to enrich knowledge about the use of AR for mathematical creativity. This study also implicitly analyzes the literature review on the implications of AR as a potential technology for mathematical creativity based on six themes of mathematics content according to the NCTM Principles and Standards guidelines (equity, mathematics curriculum, mathematics teaching, learning, assessment, and mathematics technology). Thus, this study is expected to guide and improve future studies and become a reference for educators, researchers, stakeholders, and policy research in AR applications for mathematical creativity.

## Related Frameworks

AR consists of three main dimensions, namely physical, cognitive, and contextual problems [9]. The physical dimension in AR applications is the physical manipulation that results in natural interactions and representations of educational concepts. The cognitive dimension is the alignment between spatiotemporal information through AR experiences for students' symbolic understanding. Meanwhile, the contextual dimension means that AR applications create collaborative learning between virtual and non-traditional environments based on experiences in everyday life. AR combines 3D and virtual physical objects in mathematics classes [9]. More importantly, AR applications act as self-guided guides for learning mathematics and visualizing abstract mathematical concepts for students [14]. This shows that AR applications can effectively address challenges in enhancing students' mathematics learning and creativity [5,15]. In addition, AR can increase students' motivation to learn mathematics [8,13], understanding of abstract and complex mathematical principles [12], mathematical didactic skills [7,11]; partial skills, and students' mathematical geometric construction [10]. Therefore, AR applications are effective in digital learning [14].

AR applications are an effective strategy for all areas of education, so a review of the literature on AR applications has been reviewed in recent years. The bibliometric study by Hincapie et al. [16] stated that the publication rate of AR applications is increasing yearly because AR applications significantly contribute to education and affect student learning outcomes. In another contribution, Sidani et al. [17] reviewed 24 of 671 publications about AR publications in the Scopus, Academic Search Ultimate, Current Content, Web of Science, and Science Direct databases. They report that AR applications are new digital technologies that efficiently address challenges from all disciplines. The results of the literature analysis by Lin et al. [18] and Su et al. [19] also mention that AR applications are successful and effective for future research, teaching, and development. Chang et al. [13] also analyzed studies on AR applications from 2012 to 2021. They stated that AR applications could support learning environments in the future. In addition, Theodoropoulos and Lepouras [4] analyzed 31 studies on AR applications and told them that AR applications could benefit student learning and further research. This shows that AR applications contribute to the world of education, especially mathematics education.

AR applications for mathematics education have been analyzed in previous studies. For example, Salinas et al. [11] stated that AR technology supports students' mathematics education because abstract mathematical objects can be visualized realistically. AR applications can build a good mathematics learning environment for students [7]. AR application in mathematics learning is a collaboration between a virtual environment, 3D construction, and cognitive mathematics learning content [9]. 3D constructions in mathematics learning and education can be built virtually through AR applications [10]. This shows that AR applications are quite effective in learning mathematics. A systematic review literature study by Ahmad and Junaini [20] has analyzed 19 articles on the application of AR for learning mathematics. The results show that the AR application helps with visual problems and understanding abstract mathematics for students. AR application is a technology with the latest innovations to support students' skills and creativity.

As a system, AR applications for student creativity were analyzed in several literature reviews. Giannopulu et al. [21] stated that AR combines abstract physical objects with the natural environment to support students' mental and imaginative creativity. AR applications link direct user engagement, creativity, and satisfaction [22]. AR applications allow students to interact with physical objects and collaborate with colleagues through project-based learning [5]. Designing AR applications to understand a concept of knowledge is open to the creativity of media designers [23]. This shows that AR applications require creativity from the designer to support user creativity. AR applications can support everyone's creativity with various educational sciences, for example, mathematical creativity.

Previous studies have conducted literature review analyses for AR applications in mathematical creativity. Arulanand et al. [14] and Radu et al. [5] stated that AR applications effectively offer students many opportunities to be creative. AR applications can overcome the limitations of traditional teaching because AR applications can visualize abstract mathematical concepts into reality. The concept of 3D objects and visuals supports students' mathematical creativity. Research by Salinas et al. [11] used AR applications to understand mathematical material creatively. AR applications can motivate students' mathematical learning and creativity [10]. In addition, AR applications create creative learning spaces to improve students' mathematical understanding [7]. Previous studies have not explained that AR applications significantly increase students' mathematical creativity. However, a review of the literature from previous research on AR applications to mathematical creativity is still little studied by researchers.

Based on a review of the literature from recent articles on AR applications for mathematical creativity, the current review aims to complement previous research and enhance research trends on AR applications for mathematical creativity. In addition, this study continues the analysis process from a literature review on the application of AR in mathematics education and mathematical creativity. Specifically, this paper aims to analyze the research trends comprehensively and systematically on AR applications for mathematical creativity from 2015 to 2023. To achieve this goal, the research questions (RQ) in this study are as follows:

RQ1: What are the implications and features of using AR for mathematical creativity?

RQ2: What is the potential of using AR for mathematical creativity based on the six themes from the NCTM Principles and Standards?

RQ3: What are the perceptions of using AR for mathematical creativity, user criteria, measurement tools, and evaluation methods?

## Materials and Methods

Based on the research questions, this study analyzed the literature review systematically using inclusion and exclusion analysis. This follows Fiskerstrand's [24] literature review analysis with inclusion and exclusion analysis able to refine and clarify the scope of each research literature review systematically and comprehensively. Inclusion and exclusion analysis aims to systematically select relevant articles to answer research questions by following the specific guidelines of Maybury et al. [25]. Based on the inclusion and exclusion analysis criteria, this study identified implications, features of AR development, and potential parameters according to the NCTM Principles and Standards [26], in which the articles selected involved six themes from the NCTM guidelines: equity, mathematics curriculum, mathematics teaching, learning, assessment, and mathematical technology. In addition, article analysis was also carried out to identify user criteria, measuring instruments, and evaluation methods of the effectiveness of AR for mathematical creativity.

### Data Collection

Literature review searches were conducted on various databases, such as Scopus, Web of Science, PubMed, Google Scholar, and ProQuest. The selected literature articles in this study are of high quality with a systematic arrangement. The collection of journal articles in this study engages various countries in presenting the best ideas and research results. Literature data from various databases is the best for analyzing the literature review. This study takes a range of articles from 2015 to 2023 to conduct a comprehensive and systematic literature review analysis of the latest research trends. The initial search for articles in this study was conducted on 91 articles about AR applications for mathematical creativity by searching for "Keyword-Title," namely "Augmented Reality Applications"; "Augmented Reality Applications for Education"; "Augmented Reality Applications for Mathematics Education"; "Augmented Reality Applications for Creativity"; and "Augmented Reality Applications for Mathematical Creativity."

This literature review is based on inclusion and exclusion criteria, namely (1) articles published in international journals from various databases, such as Web of Science, PubMed, Google Scholar, ProQuest, and others; (2) topics of published articles about AR applications for mathematical creativity; (3) article interval from 2015 to 2023; (4) full-text articles; and (5) articles covering the six themes of the NCTM [26]. The articles are downloaded and analyzed systematically to determine if they meet the inclusion and exclusion criteria. The next step is to filter articles according to the inclusion and exclusion criteria. This screening process resulted in the reduction of 91 articles to 66 articles. Furthermore, 66 articles were analyzed more systematically and comprehensively based on research questions.

### Data Analysis

The data analysis process in this study was based on inclusion and exclusion analysis [24]. Limitations of the literature review analysis in this study focused on AR applications for creativity. The literature review analysis of journal articles was conducted in 2015–2023. Journal articles that met all the inclusion and exclusion criteria were then analyzed based on (1) the implications and features of using AR for mathematical creativity; (2) the potential of using AR for mathematical creativity based on the six themes of the NCTM Principles and Standards; (3) perceptions of the use of AR for mathematical creativity, participant criteria, and evaluation methods based on journal articles on the application of AR for mathematical creativity from 2015 to 2023.

In analyzing the literature review, this study compared the distribution of articles from various databases regarding features, implications, and potential of using AR for mathematical creativity. This study continues the analysis to the next step, namely comparing articles about perceptions, user criteria, measurement tools, and evaluation methods of the effectiveness of AR for mathematical creativity. The number and citations of articles from each year were determined in detail and analyzed to answer this research question systematically. Data analysis consisted of collecting data from 66 articles from 2015 to 2023 related to using AR for mathematical creativity, filtering and describing more straightforward research questions (without repetition), and counting the number of citations from the selected articles in this study. All data information is inputted into Microsoft Excel based on research questions. Data analysis in this study uses descriptive statistics. In addition to presenting graphs, tables, and diagrams, they are also used for detailed analysis in identifying information about AR applications for mathematical creativity.

## Results

This study compares previous studies on identifying AR applications for mathematical creativity from 2015 to 2023. The literature consists of 66 articles that were previously synthesized and analyzed. Literature review activities focused on finding implications, features, and potential parameters according to the six themes of the NCTM Principles and Standards [26], user criteria, measurement tools, and evaluation methods of using AR for mathematical creativity. Therefore, this study will answer and explain the three research questions in depth.

**TABLE 1** Summary of studies on augmented reality applications for mathematical creativity

| No. | Citation | Implications | User Criteria | Evaluation Method | Measuring Instrument |
|:---:|:---:|:---|:---|:---|:---|
| 1 | [27] | Augmented reality (AR) technology has positive potential and advantages in education. AR in mathematics aims to teach geometry through the use of 3D geometric concepts in mathematics learning so that AR develops creativity, knowledge, and innovation in education | Students in various levels of education | The results of the literature review | Meta-analysis |
| 2 | [28] | College students can use augmented reality and virtual reality to understand mechanical engineering, mathematics, and geometry; students can interpret reality according to experience and produce novelty, understanding, and knowledge | Students in various levels of education | The results of the literature review | Analysis of study literature |
| 3 | [29] | Augmented reality (AR) motivates students to study natural sciences, physics, and mathematics, develop technical creativity, and carry out research activities and projects to be important | Students in second education | The results of the literature review | Analysis of study literature |
| 4 | [15] | AR applications create integration and interaction between real and virtual environments, enabling enormous versatility and creativity in applications. Thus, Augmented Reality improves Higher Education students in learning mathematics | Students from the Portuguese Polytechnic Higher education | Product Effectiveness | Questionnaire and interview, and observation; test |
| 5 | [18] | This study shows the effectiveness of solid geometry learning using an augmented reality-assisted learning system because the design of a learning system with AR can combine real, creative, and media environments into a hybrid environment | 76 Eighth-grade students from Tainan City, Taiwan | Students' math scores and spatial perception | Test; observations and interviews |
| 6 | [30] | This research develops educational programs to enhance student learning effects and suggests more systematic and practical problem-solving procedures for inquiry learning | Students in various levels of education | Survey results | Survey |
| 7 | [31] | The use of Cyberchase Shape Quest as an augmented reality math application to teach geometry and involve elementary school children's spatial cognition skills. Applications can lead student teams to be creative to reinforce perceptual cues | Designed for children 6-8 years old, elementary school children | Product feasibility test results, video data to identify student responses | Test product effectiveness with formative evaluation and video recording |
| 8 | [32] | The integration of technology from Augmented Reality (AR), Virtual Learning (VR), and Mobile Learning (ML) in the teaching and learning process can provide a new, creative, innovative learning environment and improve the quality of teaching and learning | Students in various levels of education | The results of the literature review | Meta-Analysis |
| 9 | [33] | Media puzzle Augmented Reality system for improving students' creative thinking skills and problem-solving abilities | Infant | The results of the literature review | Theoretical study |
| 10 | [34] | Private school teachers are more interested in developing a Character Building Learning Model using Mobile Augmented Reality media to learn mathematics because it can increase students' creativity and critical thinking | The subjects were sixth-year students from 10 public schools and five private primary schools | Product feasibility | Questionnaire |
| 11 | [35] | A Meta-Analysis regarding the implications of the effectiveness of Augmented Reality applications in education. In teaching mathematics and geometry, AR can achieve high academic success and student motivation; increase imagination and creativity | Students in various levels of education | The results of the literature review | Meta-analysis |
| 12 | [36] | Augmented reality-based Robot Media can increase the interest, motivation, and creativity of elementary education students in Turkey. Media Robot has a positive effect on improving student learning practices in learning science and mathematical principles | Primary school-age children | The results of the literature review | Theoretical study |
| 13 | [37] | The module "Representation of information on a computer" using two different technologies, "Augmented Reality and the Web," contributes positively to student performance improvement, motivation, and creativity | 42 Students in the second year of junior high school | Quiz and questionnaire data | Quiz; Questionnaire |
| 14 | [38] | Augmented reality technology contributes positively to improving elementary school students' narrative skills and creativity in storytelling activities | 100 Fifth grade elementary school students | Post-test scores to measure students' creativity and narrative skills | Post-test |
| 15 | [39] | The use of Augmented Reality has a positive impact on improving students' academic achievement, motivation, and knowledge acquisition, knowledge retention, satisfaction, and student creativity in inquiry-based learning in formal education | K-12 students; Higher Education | The results of the literature review | Literature review using inclusion and exclusion criteria, and the PRISMA model |
| 16 | [40] | The ability of augmented reality technology can overcome anxiety about mathematics; increase learning motivation; students' spatial abilities, understanding the concept of cones in mathematical knowledge | Student in mathematics education | The results of the literature review | Literature review |
| 17 | [41] | Promote math learning with Augmented Reality Enhanced Tabletop System consisting of a set of interactive 3D educational materials that can visualize real objects and creative scenarios for solving math problems in virtual shopping simulation games | Twenty-two students, whose ages are between 6 and 12, enrolled in primary education in a public school in Alicante (Spain) | Pre-test results, post-test results | Pre-achievement test; post achievement test and the motivation questionnaire |
| 18 | [42] | Augmented reality can develop collaborative creativity; as well as supporting creativity-based learning such as in the integrated study of Science, Technology, Engineering, Arts and Mathematics (STEAM) | Student in various levels of education | The results of the literature review | Theoretical study |
| 19 | [43] | Augmented Reality technology in an interactive educational game is designed to learn various abstract concepts, such as color mixing, mathematics, and recognition of 2D-3D geometric shapes in preschool children aged 4-7 years. The product developed is more focused on developing children's creativity | This study involved five volunteer parents who had children aged 4-6 years and had experience using tablets or smartphones | Product use experience | Tests, surveys and interviews |
| 20 | [44] | The interaction between Direct Instruction Learning Strategy and Mobile Augmented Reality can improve students' cognitive learning outcomes, motivation, and spatial skills, so that the learning process becomes active and creative | 245 Students in the course of Geometry. Subject from mathematics education of the University of PGRI Semarang | Cognitive learning outcomes of students and effectiveness of learning strategies with Mobile Augmented Reality | Interview, test, and documentation |
| 21 | [45] | The use of Augmented reality and Virtual reality technology in the application of specific learning strategies has an impact on reducing anxiety levels during mathematics lessons, increasing motivation and students' creativity and innovation | Students in engineering education | A comprehensive view of relevant research related to the use of augmented reality technology in engineering education | Literature review |
| 22 | [46] | Augmented reality applications and hand gestures can increase the creative power and logical analysis of students and students. In addition, hand gestures provide students with an intuitive and natural way to interact with 3D shapes in learning 3D geometry | Twenty-seven High school students and university students | Results of product trials | Product trial, questionnaires |
| 23 | [47] | The review analysis also examines the implications of Augmented Reality (AR) in learning geometry providing new opportunities for teaching, learning, research, or creative inquiry | - | The results of the literature review | Literature review |
| 24 | [48] | STEM learning with Augmented reality impacts positive perceptions, interest, motivation, and student learning performance. The students' experience thinking through these AR lessons inspires them to be innovative and creative | A total participant of 32 grade 10 students from a private senior high school in Taipei City | Perceptions and experiences of students from using the product | Questionnaire |
| 25 | [49] | The development of Augmented reality and Virtual reality can improve digital era literacy, creative thinking, collaboration, problem-solving skills, and communication between students | K-12, higher and tertiary education students | The results of the literature review | Literature review with inclusion and exclusion criteria |
| 26 | [50] | Augmented and virtual reality affect students' learning styles during creative design | Thirty volunteers participated in the study | Product effectiveness | Post-test: technology acceptance model; and pre-test: the VARK learning styles inventory |
| 27 | [51] | Developing digital game applications with Augmented Reality can create a fun environment, increase creativity and motivate students to learn mathematics | Participants were students in the primary schools in Yogyakarta; Ngembak 2 public elementary school | Product effectiveness | Black Box Testing; Observation and interview |
| 28 | [52] | The development of Augmented reality using the Unity Tool significantly contributes deeply to student engagement and instructive performance results because the class becomes interactive, lively, and interesting for students | Student in history education | The results of the literature review | Literature review |
| 29 | [53] | Augmented Reality (AR) has the potential to be effective for learning complex mathematics (geometry) by visualizing 3D models so that students' spatial thinking develops. Learners will have the competence, essential skills, and knowledge to solve real problems appropriately and creatively | Students in various levels of education | The results of the literature review | Literature review |
| 30 | [54] | Augmented Reality mathematics (AR Math) in digital learning can raise the ability to think independently, interest, creativity, and critical analysis of high school students | 6th-Grade students of an elementary school with a total of 63 students | Students' motivation, understanding of learning, and acceptance of technology | Achievement tests; questionnaires and teachers' and children's interviews |
| 31 | [55] | The Victory of Culture Games (VOC-Game), a media for learning mathematics based on augmented reality, provides space for students to optimize their potential and develop their reasoning and creativity | Students in various levels of education | The results of the literature review | Literature review |
| 32 | [56] | Augmented reality with STEM-based learning (STEM-AR) has the potential to support scientific literacy in vocational education | Students in vocational education | The results of the literature review | Literature review |
| 33 | [57] | Developing an open, collaborative learning environment using Augmented Reality Interaction Media (AIMs) as a scaffold to increase creativity, divergent thinking, fluency, flexibility, and originality. A collaborative open-ended approach using AIM can improve collaborative creative problem solving based on the Mathematics syllabus | 7th-Grade students at a sub-urban Indian school | Student performance and product feasibility test | Video recordings; Observation Logs; students' answer sheet; interview transcript; divergent thinking test |
| 34 | [58] | The teacher's point of view in developing augmented reality (AR) applications is that AR can improve the learning process, motivation, creativity, and learning effectiveness | 20 Teachers, 13 women, and seven men, working in secondary education; junior high schools and senior high schools | Teaching experience on augmented reality applications in education | Questionnaire and Interview Guide |
| 35 | [59] | Teaching complex mathematical operations using AR can improve abstract thinking; cultivate reasoning power, spatial skills; critical thinking; creativity; communication; and problem-solving abilities | Teacher and student in math education | The results of the literature review | Literature review |
| 36 | [60] | The virtual environment from the effective use of Augmented Reality (AR) and Virtual Reality (VR) can encourage student creativity and innovation in learning in STEM classes | Student in various levels of education | The results of the literature review | Literature review |
| 37 | [61] | Using applications from augmented reality and simulation mode can positively affect students' achievement in mathematics and visual thinking. In addition, augmented reality also stimulates thought and creativity in learning geometry | All 7th-grade students at Manar School in Abu Dhabi. The sample consists of 86 students in mathematics | Achievement of mathematics and visual thinking students | Mathematics test and Visual thinking test |
| 38 | [62] | The use of augmented reality has a positive impact on motivation, cognitive performance, collaboration, and creativity in mathematics and science learning content | 106 School teachers | Participants experience using augmented reality | Online structured survey |
| 39 | [63] | The development of 3D tools with augmented reality, virtual environments, and 3D printing positively impacts students' spatial mathematical skills so that visualization skills and mathematical creativity can develop through augmented reality | Analysis of variance with a sample of N=993 students and participants who took the spatial test were N=442 students | Spatial test results; participants' perceptions and experiences of using 3D tools | Surveys; test of spatial math skills |
| 40 | [64] | The "AR3 Vector" application is a development of an augmented reality application that can help students to see the world around them in a new way, realistically and creatively connected to students | Students in higher education | Literature on "Vector AR3" Applications in STEM Education | Literature review |
| 41 | [65] | Augmented reality media combined with a pedagogical approach can attract students' motivation and curiosity so that students are more active, creative, and highly enthusiastic about learning especially mathematics | Students in various levels of education | The results of the literature review | Literature review |
| 42 | [66] | Augmented reality technology is one of the solutions to improve problem-solving and spatial skills; augmented reality technology can combine the real and virtual worlds. Students become motivated to be creative and innovative when facing problems | Students in various levels of education | The results of the literature review | Literature review |
| 43 | [67] | The need for learning Algebra with Augmented Reality through photo math has a significant impact on improving Algebra learning in lower secondary education. A new and creative way to learn and teach mathematics using augmented reality technology | 33 Lower secondary students in Malaysia | Pre-test data and post-test data; Questionnaire data | Pre-test, post-test, and questionnaire |
| 44 | [68] | Various learning strategies (such as interactive learning, game-based learning, and experiential learning) with augmented reality have great potential in the design of creative teaching strategies | Students in various levels of education | The results of the literature review | A systematic literature search in databases: Scopus, Web of Science, Science Direct, Taylor Francis, and Springer |
| 45 | [69] | Augmented Reality technology with Indigenous Bali can create opportunities for cultural preservation in creative media during the Industrial Revolution 4.0 | - | Recommend positive regarding augmented reality prototype | Test the product with feedback on an augmented reality prototype |
| 46 | [70] | Augmented reality can trigger students' critical thinking and creativity in learning mathematics for integer material | Ninety-five students from five schools on Bawean Island. The students are all in seventh grade | Students' critical thinking | Pretest and posttest to test critical thinking; and questionnaire |
| 47 | [71] | Learning the STEAM model (science, technology, engineering, and mathematics) in the Massive Open Online Course using Augmented Reality technology can increase student creativity and Innovation | - | Product feasibility | Validation test by seven experts |
| 48 | [20] | A Systematic Literature Review shows that augmented reality technology can help increase students' understanding of STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics) education and collaborative creativity between students during mathematics learning | Students in various levels of education | The results of the literature review | A systematic review and Meta-analyses (PRISMA) |
| 49 | [14] | Learning experiences using augmented reality frameworks on mobile phones offer opportunities for students to be creative and an element of motivation and collaboration in engineering education. The application of AR is adapted to the syllabus of an engineering education curriculum | Students in engineering education | A Framework for Using Augmented Reality for engineering education | Exploration for the effectiveness of implementing Augmented reality |
| 50 | [72] | Augmented reality tools effectively reduce fear and anxiety toward geometry class, encourage students' interest in mathematics, increase students' creative potential, and solve two-dimensional geometric problems | Students of grades 7-9 | The results of the analysis of product effectiveness | Analysis from two augmented reality tools: Arloon Geometry and Geometry AR |
| 51 | [73] | Development of a virtual geometry prototype model that can display objects and learning materials realistically, feature videos, images, and animations, so that the prototype can increase students' interest in learning mathematics, the willingness and creativity of students during learning mathematics | One hundred and twenty students in three junior high schools in Padang; Indonesia | Product effectiveness | Tests and analysis. Mock-up (evaluation) |
| 52 | [74] | The development of augmented reality worksheets with a problem-based learning design helps students visualize 3D objects. This aims to improve students' mathematical literacy skills and the ability to think and act creatively, productively, independently, collaboratively, and communicatively | Students from Islamic State Junior High School 3 Kebumen | Student literacy skills; product feasibility | Product feasibility test; math literacy test (pre-test and post-test) |
| 53 | [75] | Students are satisfied with using Smart-flashcard as a mobile augmented reality application, which significantly impacts their learning outcomes | The population was first-grade pupils aged between 6 and 7 years old. The sample consisted of 62 primary school pupils enrolled in public schools in Cairo, Egypt | The pupils' achievement, motivation and creativity | Basic Geometry Concepts Test (BGCT); Torrance Tests of Creative Thinking (TTCT); Instructional Materials Motivation Survey (IMMS). Post-test: BGCT; TTCT; IMMS |
| 54 | [76] | Augmented reality technology effectively increases elementary school student's achievement and creative thinking, motivation, and learning involvement in learning geometry | Students in art education | Product effectiveness; and students' knowledge before and after the use of AR applications | Pre-test and post-test |
| 55 | [77] | The development of augmented reality applications can increase understanding, generate motivation, creativity, and interest, and visualize students' thoughts in learning computer network devices | 31 Students of the Information System Study Program, Sultan Syarif Kasim State Islamic University, Indonesia | Product Effectiveness | Evaluation using the SUS score (System Usability Scale) |
| 56 | [78] | A Systematic Review shows that augmented reality (AR) technology can improve students' spatial abilities and motivation in mathematics education. AR can increase students' productivity, creativity, and collaboration in mathematics | Students in mathematics education | The results of the literature review | Literature review |
| 57 | [4] | The positive impact of augmented reality in programming education is active student involvement, fun interventions; motivated collaboration; creativity; immediate feedback, communication, and social skills of students | Students in programming education | The results of the literature review | Literature review |
| 58 | [79] | The application of augmented reality can increase participants' perceptions and creative thinking. Participants can form ideas, appreciate new ideas, and evaluate critical ideas | 39 Taiwanese freshmen | Perceptions of creative thinking and learning motivation | The Instructional Materials Motivation Survey (IMMS), an augmented reality survey; test |
| 59 | [80] | Using the Cosmos Planet Go application based on augmented reality can improve student learning performance, learning effectiveness, and motivation. Implementing creative situated augmented reality learning can support student involvement in creative expression | The Experimental group had 40 students. The control group has 40 students in 5th grade and 6th grade | Learning effectiveness, learning motivation, flow experience, and creative perception | Post-test; IMMS (Instructional Materials Motivation Scale) and flow experience test scale; interview |
| 60 | [81] | Augmented reality (AR) mobile apps can improve piano skills. The study results may interest piano teachers seeking innovative opportunities to modernize pedagogical practice | Forty-seven university students in Harbin, Heilongjiang Province, China | Technical skills of a pianist | Pedagogical practice; students' subjective attitudes and personal learning progress |
| 61 | [82] | The use of Augmented Reality in STEM education (Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics) to deliver practical and creative teaching parts | Augmented reality for students in the early grades and higher grades | To explore AR learning applications | A systematic review |
| 62 | [83] | The use of GeoGebra augmented reality is effective for learning and teaching mathematics because students are involved in a virtual environment that is integrated into their real world, and the content of the material is explored in a creative way that students learn | Freshman students in mathematics education | Learning experience | Exploring mathematics teaching and learning process using GeoGebra with Augmented reality |
| 63 | [84] | The integration of Android-based adventure games and augmented reality is effective in increasing students' interest in learning; interactive, creative, and efficient learning | Augmented reality application is applied to 3 teachers and 11 students | The validity, Effective, Interactive, Efficient, and Creativity of the product | A questionnaire using the Likert scale |
| 64 | [85] | Augmented reality (AR) applications' interactive design with mathematical simulations supports virtual experiments and produces data that resembles real experiments. Applications can foster students' creativity and imagination because they have positive experiences using mobile AR applications | Student in chemical engineering | Pre-test and post-test scores | Pre-test and post-test; questionnaire |
| 65 | [86] | An augmented reality-integrated science book focusing on environmental pollution and global warming in STEAM education can lead students to think critically by looking at real-life problems from different perspectives, having dialogue and discussion, sharing ideas, and creating creative solutions | The AR-integrated science book was delivered to 2 science teachers and their 15 junior high school students in Malang, Indonesia | Perceptions of teachers and students | Questionnaire Sets |
| 66 | [87] | Augmented reality-based virtual educational robotics effectively encourages students' computational thinking skills (CT), learning enjoyment, academic achievement, increased creative thinking, critical thinking, and problem-solving skills | The experimental group is 41 students who use AR Bot, and the control group is 34 students who use Scratch | Test score | Test |

### What are the Implications and Features of Using Augmented Reality for Mathematical Creativity?

The articles were analyzed and grouped based on the types of implications of using AR for mathematical creativity that is rooted in the development of other abilities or skills of students. Based on the implications, 15 articles discuss using AR in mathematical creativity and its implications for improving students' cognitive performance. Based on the implications for cognitive performance, 5 of the 15 articles discuss that AR in mathematical creativity has implications for increasing student learning performance; 7 out of 15 articles explain increasing student knowledge; 1 article describes the implications of AR for logistics analysis; another article focuses on the implications of AR for computation skills; and 1 other article focuses on the implications of using AR for mathematical representation.

**FIGURE 1** Distribution of articles on augmented reality with implications for cognitive performance

| Category | Value |
|:---|:---:|
| Mathematical representation | 1 |
| Student's performance | 5 |
| Student's knowledge | 7 |
| Computation skills | 1 |
| Logistic analysis | 1 |

Based on the student's knowledge aspect, three of the seven articles focused on using AR in mathematical creativity, which has implications for knowledge development. One of seven articles shows that the use of AR has implications for acquiring knowledge; another article shows the use of AR, which has implications for the smoothness of the process of assimilation of knowledge; and another article focused on AR, which has implications for finding creative solutions. This is shown visually in Figure 2.

**FIGURE 2** Distribution of articles on Augmented Reality with implications for Student's Knowledge

| Category | Value (%) |
|:---|:---:|
| Build knowledge | 35 |
| Acquire Knowledge | 15 |
| Finding creative solutions | 10 |
| Assimilation of knowledge | 10 |
| Additional information | 10 |

Studies from 2015 to 2023 have investigated the implications of AR in mathematical creativity, which have implications for problem-solving processes. Based on the problem-solving process, seven articles discuss the use of AR in mathematical creativity, which has implications for improving students' comprehension. Eleven articles inform the use of AR in mathematical creativity, which has implications for improving problem-solving abilities. Nine articles explain AR in mathematical creativity, which has implications for increasing students' interest. Two articles show that AR has implications for improving students' reasoning. The development of AR can increase students' reasoning [59]. AR can produce a visually environmental to make student learning more engaging experiences creative and meaningful [50]. The distribution of articles related to the implications of AR in the problem-solving process is shown in Figure 3.

**FIGURE 3** Distribution of articles related to the Implications of Augmented Reality in the problem-solving process

| Category | Value (%) |
|:---|:---:|
| Problem solving Ability | 40 |
| Interest | 25 |
| Comprehension | 15 |
| Reasoning | 10 |

Based on the analysis of the literature review from 2015 to 2023, the use of AR for mathematical creativity also has implications for increasing students' self-potential. Based on self-potential, 22 articles examine the use of AR in mathematical creativity, which has direct implications for increasing student learning motivation. There is one article that discusses the implication of creative AR on increasing students' curiosity, another article that discusses the implications of AR on increasing student satisfaction, and another article about the implications of AR on increasing the enjoyment of learning. On the other hand, four articles examine the use of AR in mathematical creativity, which has implications for students' mathematical communication, and four other articles examine the implications of AR on students' positive responses or perspectives. The distribution of articles discussing AR in mathematical creativity, which has direct implications for self-potential development, is shown in Figure 4.

**FIGURE 4** Distribution of articles on the implications of Augmented Reality for Self-Potential

| Category | Percentage (%) |
|:---|:---:|
| Motivation | 45 |
| Positive perception | 18 |
| Communication | 12 |
| Enjoyment of learning | 6 |
| Satisfaction | 3 |
| Curiosity | 2 |

The results of the literature review analysis show that AR has implications for creativity and the development of social skills from students [4,49]. Based on developing self-skills, two articles state AR's implications for developing students' visual thinking skills. Seven articles examine AR's implications for spatial thinking. Three articles show AR's implications for improving students' literacy skills. On the other hand, only one article shows AR can improve students' narrative skills, namely [38] (Figure 5).

**FIGURE 5** Implications of Augmented Reality for the improvement of social skills

| Category | Value (%) |
|:---|:---:|
| Spatial thinking | 40 |
| Literacy skills | 25 |
| Visual thinking skills | 15 |
| Narrative skills | 10 |

Based on the aspect of improving self-ability, the results of the analysis show that five articles examine students' critical thinking improvement by AR; one article examines AR has implications for increasing intuitive thinking, one article shows AR has implications for fluency in the production of new ideas, and one other article discusses the advantages of AR in increasing divergent thinking. The distribution of articles about the implications of AR for increasing self-ability is shown in Figure 6.

**FIGURE 6** Distribution of articles about the implications of Augmented Reality for self-ability

| Category | Value (%) |
|:---|:---:|
| Critical Thinking | 45 |
| Intuitive Thinking | 15 |
| Production of new ideas | 10 |
| Divergent thinking | 8 |

The results of the literature review analysis show the features in the development of AR for mathematical creativity. One article mentions that the features of head-mounted displays and personal interaction panels are useful in developing AR applications. Another article mentions that 3D Visualization and AR are good for learning. Other important features from the development of AR are Unity3D [52] and Vuforia [78]; HP Reveals; Blippar; ENTiTi Creator; HD Augmented Reality; Metaio SDK [20]. The literature review results show that the most dominant features used in developing AR for mathematical creativity are the Unity3D tool and Vuforia (Figure 7).

**FIGURE 7** Distribution of features from using Augmented Reality

| Category | Value (%) |
|:---|:---:|
| Unity3D | 28 |
| Vuforia | 20 |
| 3D Visualization | 15 |
| HPE Reveal | 10 |
| Blippar | 8 |
| ENTiTi Creator | 7 |
| HD Augmented Reality | 6 |
| Metaio SDK | 5 |
| Personal interaction panels | 4 |
| Head-mounted displays | 3 |

### What is the Potential of Using Augmented Reality for Mathematical Creativity Based on the Six Themes from NCTM Principles and Standards?

The results of the literature review analysis show the potential of AR for mathematical creativity, which are grouped based on six themes from the NCTM Principles and Standards [26]: equity, mathematics curriculum, mathematics teaching, learning, assessment, and mathematics technology. There may be overlapping groupings of article publications based on the six themes of NCTM [26], as shown in Table 2.

**TABLE 2** Publication of articles on the potential of Augmented Reality based on the NCTM [26]

| Theme | Citations |
|:---|:---|
| Equity | [13,18,28,31,32,34–36,40,42,44,45,48,50,52,54,56,59,60,62–66,72,75,77,80,81,85,87] |
| Curriculum | [13,37,49,58,75,80,85] |
| Teaching | [4,14,37,44,46,47,54,60,64,68,72,77,80–83] |
| Learning | [18,20,27,29,30,34,36,38–43,48,51,53,54,56,62,64,68,71,74,78,83,86] |
| Evaluation | [13,37,57,68,77,79,80,85] |
| Technology | [18,31,33,36,41,43,46,51,55,60,67,73,84,87] |

Based on Table 2, the results of the analysis of the literature review show that 29 articles discuss the equity of AR. Equity in this study focuses on the advantages of AR for improving learning practices and student performance. Six articles discuss using AR in mathematical creativity based on improving the educational curriculum. AR application development supports the educational curriculum [49]. Fourteen articles discuss the effectiveness of AR-based teaching in increasing students' creativity and self-skills. Thirty-two articles discuss learning activities based on AR and processes to construct student understanding. Seven articles discuss the evaluation of the application of AR in the teaching and learning of mathematics. Fourteen articles discuss the development of AR technology into developing new AR applications that are interesting and support increased student performance. Based on NCTM [26], technology is very important in improving the teaching and learning of mathematics. This study analyzes the development of AR technology or combining AR with other applications to become creative new AR applications. Publications related to the attributes of AR Application technology development are shown in Table 3.

**TABLE 3** Attributes related to the development of augmented reality technology

| Attributes | Citations |
|:---|:---|
| Cyberchase Shape Quest: Patch the Path, Feed the Critters, and Hide and Seek | [31] |
| Integration of Augmented Reality (AR), Virtual Learning Environment (VLE), and Mobile Learning (ML) | [32] |
| Picture puzzle augmented reality system | [33] |
| Robotics based on Augmented reality | [36] |
| Integration of Augmented Reality and the Web | [37] |
| Tabletop System with Augmented reality | [41] |
| Augmented reality application with hand gestures | [46] |
| Integration of Virtual reality and Augmented reality | [28,49,50,60] |
| Digital games using Augmented reality | [43,51] |
| AR Math app | [54] |
| The Victory of Culture Games (VOC-Games) | [55] |
| AR3 Vector Application | [64] |
| Application of Photomath | [67] |
| Virtual geometry (VirGO) based on augmented reality | [73] |
| Integration of Adventure Game and Augmented Reality | [84] |
| Augmented reality-based science book | [86] |
| Virtual educational robotics with Augmented reality | [87] |

### What are the Perceptions of Using Augmented Reality (AR) for Mathematical Creativity, User Criteria, Measurement Tools, and Evaluation Methods?

#### Perceptions of Using Augmented Reality (AR) for Mathematical Creativity

The perception from the literature review regarding the use of AR is that AR can develop students' creativity and innovative mathematics with real or real visualization [4,14,15,18,20,27,29,34,36,38,41,42,44,48,51,53–56,59–62,64–68,70,71,73–80,82,84,86,87].

**FIGURE 8** Distribution of articles on perceptions of using AR for mathematical creativity

| Category | Value (%) |
|:---|:---:|
| Creative media | 40 |
| Creative teaching strategies | 12 |
| Creative power | 8 |
| Creative potential | 6 |
| Creative collaboration | 10 |
| Research creatively | 10 |
| Creative thinking ability | 8 |
| Creative solution | 4 |

Based on perceptions related to student creativity through AR, six articles explain perceptions regarding the effective use of AR as a creative learning media. Three articles show perceptions regarding using AR to help creative collaboration between students. Two articles stated that AR could improve students' creative thinking skills, two articles stated that AR is a good topic for creative research, and one article stated that integrating AR and teaching strategies is the best creative teaching strategy.

#### User Criteria of Augmented Reality Technology for Mathematical Creativity

Based on the use of AR for mathematical creativity, the results of a literature review from 2015 to 2023 show eight criteria for users who have implemented AR technology. User criteria based on the literature review are shown in detail in Table 4.

**TABLE 4** User Criteria of Augmented reality technology for mathematical creativity

| Criteria | Citations |
|:---|:---|
| Infant—Early childhood education | [33,43] |
| K1/Kindergarten (5-6) | — |
| K2-K6/Primary school (6-12)/Elementary School | [36,38,41,51,75,80] |
| K6-K10/Junior High school/High School/Secondary School/Incomplete Secondary School/Intermediate school/middle school | [18,29,37,46,57,61,67,70,72–74,86] |
| K11-K14/Senior High School/Higher secondary school/senior secondary school/intermediate college/pre-university college | [48] |
| K11-K12/Secondary Schools/Senior High | [39,40,49] |
| K15-K20/Community College/Universities/Higher education/University student | [4,14,15,28,44,45,46,56,63,64,76,77,81,83,85,87] |
| Teacher | [58,62] |
| Others | [50,84] |

Based on Table 4, 19 articles show that the use of AR technology is dominated by increasing the mathematical creativity of university students. Twelve articles examine AR as the second-best for junior high school students. Six articles show that elementary school students can apply AR, and three articles show that secondary school students can apply AR to increase their creativity and comprehension. Furthermore, two articles said AR could increase infant creativity; two articles said AR helps teachers improve their learning process, and two other articles said AR is useful in everyday life. One article states that AR can develop the creativity of higher secondary school students.

#### Measuring Tool for Test the Effectiveness of AR Technology in Increasing Mathematical Creativity

Furthermore, a literature review of 66 articles on AR for mathematical creativity from 2015 to 2023 shows that 23 articles used a meta-analysis measure to identify the advantages of AR applications for mathematical creativity. Tests for increasing student creativity by AR were also carried out using various measuring instruments, 19 articles using a questionnaire, 18 articles using a test instrument, 1 article using a quiz, 7 articles using interviews, 5 articles using observation, and 4 articles using video recording. In addition, eight articles used an effectiveness test to test AR technology as an appropriate learning media for teaching mathematics and enhancing mathematical creativity (Figure 9).

**FIGURE 9** Measuring tool to test the effectiveness of AR technology

| Category | Value (%) |
|:---|:---:|
| Analysis of review literature | 28 |
| Questionnaire | 22 |
| Test | 18 |
| Interview | 10 |
| Observation | 8 |
| Quiz | 4 |
| Video recording | 3 |
| Effectiveness test | 2 |
| Meta-analysis | 2 |

#### Evaluation Method

In Figure 10, the results of the analysis of the literature review show an evaluation method for testing the application of AR in mathematical creativity. Twenty-seven articles describe the advantages of AR through the results of the analysis of the literature review. Seventeen articles describe the role of AR as an effective product in learning. Three articles describe teachers' experiences regarding the effectiveness of using AR in their mathematics learning process. Twenty articles explain that AR can improve student academic achievement. Nine articles discussing AR can increase students' creativity and thinking skills. Ten articles mentioned that AR can increase students' motivation to learn mathematics.

**FIGURE 10** Distribution for the evaluation method

| Category | Percentage (%) |
|:---|:---:|
| Results of analysis of literature review | 33 |
| Student achievement | 28 |
| result of feasibility test or product effectiveness | 20 |
| Creativity and thinking skills of students | 12 |
| Motivation | 6 |
| Survey results | 4 |
| Teacher Experience | 2 |

## Discussion, Implication, and Conclusions

In this section, this study informs the development of AR research to advance mathematics education and creativity in the future. This study reviewed 66 articles on the use of AR for mathematical creativity from 2015 to 2023 and then analyzed the literature review results based on three research questions. Based on the literature review analysis; the implications, features, potential, perceptions, evaluation methods, and user criteria of the use of AR for mathematical creativity are studied in more depth to enhance future studies and become a reference for educators, researchers, stakeholders, and policy research in AR application for mathematical creativity.

### Implications and Features of Using Augmented Reality for Mathematical Creativity

The implications of using AR for mathematical creativity provide a positive increase in students' abilities, performance, and learning skills. Based on the literature review above, this study shows that using AR for mathematical creativity has other implications for improving students' cognitive performance; problem-solving process; self-potential; social skills, and self-ability.

Based on the results of an in-depth review of the literature, the use of AR technology for mathematical creativity, which has implications for cognitive performance, can be broken down again, including the implications of AR for increasing student performance, student knowledge, logistics analysis; computation skills; mathematical representation. The results of the review analysis show that AR for mathematical creativity has implications for increasing student performance [13,37,48,52,54,80]. In addition, AR can have implications for the development and acquisition of knowledge [27,28,39,44]. In building knowledge, AR supports assimilating mathematical knowledge [41], adding information [47], and finding appropriate and creative mathematical solutions. In finding a solution to a problem, the use of AR technology for mathematical creativity supports an increase in students' logical analysis [46], improvement of students' computational skills [87] and students' mathematical representation [56].

Based on the implications in the problem-solving process, the implications of AR technology for mathematical creativity consist of improving comprehension; problem-solving abilities; reasoning; and interests. The application of AR to mathematical creativity also has implications for increasing the ability to solve problems that are more systematic and practical [14,30,33,44,49,55,57,66,72,85]. Thus, understanding can be resolved by scaffolding from the AR application [28,31,75,88]. With the application of AR, understanding concepts can be assisted through a realistic bridge visually [60]. AR can increase students' creativity and reasoning [55,59]. So, AR has an impact on increasing creativity and interest in learning [13,36,39,47,48,54,72,77,84,87].

AR's implications for creativity also influence students' self-potential development [55]. AR supports the emergence of positive perceptions [31,48,79,86], high curiosity [65], and learning motivation [4,13,14,36,37,39,41,44,47,48,51,58,62,66,75,79,80]. On the other hand, AR in mathematical creativity can improve students' mathematical communication [56,74], satisfaction [39], and create enjoyment of learning [87].

On the other hand, AR can improve self-ability [54]. In the aspect of self-ability, AR can develop students' critical and creative thinking [34,59,70,87]. This is supported by the opinion of Chao and Chang [54] that AR can improve students' critical analysis in solving problems. Through the application of AR, students' learning experiences in thinking become meaningful [57,60,74,85]. In the aspect of creative thinking, AR supports increasing students' intuitiveness [46]; production of novelty [28]; increasing divergent thinking [57]. In the creative process of learning mathematics, AR can increase the value of mathematics [18]. AR can support students' academics [35]. So through AR technology, students' academic achievement is very good [39,61,87].

Features of using AR for mathematical creativity. The use of head-mounted displays and personal interaction panel features in AR greatly contributes to the development of science and technology [27]. AR and 3D Visualization greatly contribute to interactive learning and education [29]. Some of the features needed in the preparation of AR-based applications, including platforms from Unity3D [52] and Vuforia [78]; HP Reveals; Blippar; ENTiTi Creator; HD Augmented Reality; Metaio SDK [20]. The review results show that the most dominant features used in developing AR for mathematical creativity are the Unity3D tool and Vuforia.

### The Potential of Using Augmented Reality for Mathematical Creativity Based on the Six Themes of the NCTM Principles and Standards

Based on Table 2, the group of publications with the theme of equity explains the advantages and effectiveness of AR applications in education [62,77]. Based on the equity of AR in creativity, AR has an impact on improving the quality of teaching and learning [30,32,34,36,65,81], integrating real and virtual environments for meaningful learning [5,13,15,18,36,41,47,50,52,56,59,60,63,64,77,85,87], decrease in the level of mathematics anxiety [40,42,72], encourage student engagement [52,54,71,75], and improve cognitive learning outcomes [44,62].

A group of publications with the theme curricula explaining the potential of AR for mathematical creativity based on educational curricula. AR technology helps increase student creativity in learning geometric concepts in the educational curriculum [75]. Creatively situated AR learning strongly supports the educational curriculum for the effectiveness of student learning [80]. Interactive AR applications that follow the educational curriculum foster creativity and provide positive learning experiences for students [85]. On the other hand, the development of AR applications can overcome the limitations of the educational curriculum because 3D models support an interesting and creative learning process for students [58]. Research from Papanastasiou et al. [49] states that integrating Virtual Reality and AR can improve the quality of the traditional curriculum for various student learning needs. Integration of AR and the web adapted to the educational curriculum improve student performance and academic achievement during school learning [37]. Thus, research on AR applications is increasingly being studied for education [89]. The application of AR in digital media is effective in improving education in the world. This confirms current research results; AR applications are very suitable for developing the quality of educational curricula. Therefore, research on AR applications will increase in the next few years. This follows the opinion of Rusli et al. [90] that AR applications can help teachers and students improve the school education curriculum. AR applications help students understand concepts in advancing modern education [91].

The publication group with the theme of mathematics teaching explains the potential of AR for mathematical creativity in a teaching process. According to NCTM [26], effective mathematics teaching requires students' understanding to learn knowledge well. AR has implications for the effectiveness of educational teaching because AR enhances students' imagination, creativity, academic success, and motivation [35,37,80], student learning interest [54], collaborative learning [68]. AR can construct abstract concepts into visualizations in teaching mathematics and science [43]. This is also following the opinion of Langer et al. [64], AR has the potential to increase didactic concepts in digital teaching. AR can be seen as a practical tool in teaching effectiveness for an essential understanding of knowledge [14,82]. In several cases in teaching mathematics, AR tools effectively support teaching two-dimensional plane geometry [72]. In addition, AR-based GeoGebra is an effective idea for mathematics teaching [83]. AR applications can also improve students' literacy, basic skills, and pedagogical practices [81]. In this case, AR provides creative opportunities in educational lessons [47]. AR application development supports increased creativity and visualization of students' thoughts in modern teaching [77].

Based on NCTM [26], mathematics learning focuses on students' mathematical activities in building and understanding new knowledge from previous experience and knowledge. Based on the theme of learning mathematics, a literature review shows that AR is effective in mathematics learning [18,20,27,29,34,35,38,41,43,47,51,53,63,78,83]. The potential of AR in learning mathematics includes helping to learn science and mathematical principles [36], sharpening numeracy skills, and training children's motor nerves in mathematics learning [51], effective in students' understanding of digital learning [54].

Based on the results of the analysis of the literature review, the integration of AR technology with learning strategies can provide creative learning designs [18,45,80,83]. Learning strategies that are well integrated with AR include interactive learning, game-based learning, collaborative learning, and experiential learning [68], direct Instruction Learning Strategy [44], problem-based learning strategy [74]. On the other hand, the application of AR can be combined with varied and fun learning models [55], including a combination with the inquiry learning model [39,74], the STEAM learning model [30,71,86], the character building learning model [34], STEM learning model [20,48,56,60,64,82].

The evaluation aspect of this study follows NCTM [26], the evaluation must support mathematics learning and provide useful information for teachers and students. The results of the literature review analysis show that the development of an AR application system is evaluated to be very effective for increasing student creativity in active learning [68,77]. Production and evaluation of teaching materials using AR technology support student learning performance in teaching and learning [37]. The effectiveness of implementing AR in a class is evaluated through the delivery of students' perceptions of critical and new ideas [79]. If students can provide various perceptions to solve problems, that is the most important element in evaluating the success of creating a learning environment based on AR in creative situations [80]. Developing a collaborative learning environment using AR media can evaluate students' creativity and divergent thinking with parameters of fluency, flexibility, and originality [57]. On the other hand, positive learning experiences in using AR are also the main evaluation in measuring the effectiveness of interactive AR application designs in a lesson [85].

Research by Buchner and Kerres [89] stated that AR applications are very effective in education and learning. However, developing a better-designed learning media between learning theory and AR application technology can become an educational gap. This is supported by Ronaghi and Ronaghi [92], good AR applications can improve someone's interest. Therefore, a combination of AR applications and appropriate teaching methods can create a good learning environment for students. In addition, Radu et al. [5] stated that integrating AR applications with STEM strategies can improve students' critical thinking. Thus, the number of published articles on the development of AR applications for learning can be further expanded and studied more deeply, especially the development of AR application technology for mathematical creativity.

The development of a new learning application through the integration of AR technology with other applications to increase student creativity is studied in six publications. Technology integration between AR, Virtual Learning Environment (VLE), and Mobile Learning (ML) supports the improvement of the learning process [32], the integration of AR and the web contributes to improving student performance [37], and Integration of Virtual reality and AR can create a virtual environment and look real for students in the process of learning mathematics [28,49,50,60]. Virtual reality and AR integration is a favorite combination of publications reviewed by research from 2015 to 2019.

### Perceptions of the Use of Augmented Reality (AR) for Mathematical Creativity and Its User Criteria

Based on the perception of using AR for mathematical creativity, AR can encourage students to create creative solutions [86], AR can increase students' creative potential [72], creative thinking skills [33,56,57], creative collaboration [20,42,49], development of creative research and investigation [29,47], AR as a creative learning media [18,34,55,69,77,78], increasing creative comprehension [46], supporting creative teaching strategy design [50,93]. This is also supported by Jessen et al.'s [22] opinion that AR applications encourage creative user engagement. AR applications create simulations that represent abstract physical objects in a real environment so that students' creativity and imaginative thinking become real and unlimited [21], especially in its application in the field of learning mathematics. Research from Coimbra et al. [15] confirmed that AR applications could improve students' mathematics learning. AR applications can integrate virtual physical objects, digital technology, and mathematical creativity. Digital technology in teaching practice encourages student creativity [94]. Thus, this provides an excellent opportunity to increase the number of published articles on using AR for mathematical creativity in the following year.

Based on the concept of mathematical material, AR can make learning mathematics interesting in new and creative ways to understand algebraic concepts [67], the concept of two-dimensional geometry [72], integer [70], cone concept [40], complex mathematical operations [59], arithmetic concepts [41,49]. The results of the review analysis state that the use of AR is dominant for geometry learning and teaching [14,18,27,35,36,43,46,47,53,61,72,73,75,82]. AR applications can convey accurate information for 3D objects [91]. In addition, AR applications involve visualizing digital models and building student understanding [95]. This article can enrich publications about implementing AR applications for education.

In the users' criteria for implementing AR, AR effectively increases students' creativity from various educational levels [4,20,28,30,35,47,60,65,66,68,78,82]. In detail, AR has a positive impact on increasing the creativity of infants or children in early childhood education; students in elementary school [36,38,41,51,75,80], students in secondary school [18,29,37,46,57,61,67,70,72–74,86], higher secondary school students [48], senior high school students [39,40,49], university student [4,14,15,28,44,45,46,56,63,64,76,77,81,83,85,87].

Based on the description above, AR applications are centered on various groups of users in educational development [3]. AR applications are based on taking real pictures; physical objects can be seen virtually and real in front of the camera [12,17]. Research by Su et al. [19] indicated that the publication of AR applications would be more successful and effective in future research and development. In addition, research by Chang et al. [13] also analyzed 134 studies on AR applications, that AR applications for education positively impact student knowledge, responses, skills, and performance in the future. This shows that AR applications will significantly impact the world of education. This study enriches information about AR applications for education, especially mathematical creativity. This literature review will serve as a reference for researchers, academics, and practitioners in mathematics education now and in the future.

## References

1. Grodotzki, J., Müller, B. T., & Tekkaya, A. E. (2023). Introducing a general-purpose augmented reality platform for the use in engineering education. *Advances in Industrial and Manufacturing Engineering*, 6, 1–18.

2. Kang, B., Crilly, N., Ning, W., & Kristensson, P. O. (2023). Prototyping to elicit user requirements for product development: Using head-mounted augmented reality when designing interactive devices. *Design Studies*, 84, 1–33.

3. De Lima, C. B., Walton, S., & Owen, T. (2022). A critical outlook at augmented reality and its adoption in education. *Computers and Education Open*, 3, 1–15.

4. Theodoropoulos, A., & Lepouras, G. (2021). Augmented reality and programming education: A systematic review. *International Journal of Child–Computer Interaction*, 30, 1–16.

5. Radu, I., Yuan, J., Huang, X., & Schneider, B. (2023). Charting opportunities and guidelines for augmented reality in makerspaces through prototyping and co-design research. *Computers and Education: X Reality*, 2, 1–18.

6. Rohil, M. K., & Ashok, Y. (2022). Visualization of urban development 3D layout plans with augmented reality. *Results in Engineering*, 14, 1–10.

7. Sommerauer, P., & Müller, O. (2014). Augmented reality in informal learning environments: A field experiment in a mathematics exhibition. *Computers and Education*, 79, 59–68.

8. Lionoa, R. A., Amandaa, N., Pratiwia, A., & Gunawan, A. A. S. (2021). A systematic literature review: Learning with visual by the help of augmented reality helps students learn better. *Procedia Computer Science*, 196, 144–152.

9. Bujak, K. R., Radu, I., Catrambone, R., MacIntyre, B., Zheng, R., & Golubski, G. (2013). A psychological perspective on augmented reality in the mathematics classroom. *Computers and Education*, 68, 536–544.

10. Kaufmann, H., & Schmalstieg, D. (2003). Mathematics and geometry education with collaborative augmented reality. *Computers and Graphics*, 27(3), 339–345.

11. Salinas, P., González-Mendívil, E., Quintero, E., Ríos, H., Ramírez, H., & Morales, S. (2013). The development of a didactic prototype for the learning of mathematics through augmented reality. *Procedia Computer Science*, 25, 62–70.

12. Wan, X., Shen, L., Fang, Z., Dong, S., Zhang, S., & Lin, C. (2022). A novel motionless calibration method for augmented reality surgery navigation system based on optical tracker. *Heliyon*, 8(12), 1–9.

13. Chang, H. Y., Binali, T., Liang, J. C., Chiou, G. L., Cheng, K. H., Lee, S. W. Y., & Tsai, C. C. (2022). Ten years of augmented reality in education: A meta-analysis of (quasi-) experimental studies to investigate the impact. *Computers and Education*, 191, 1–24.

14. Arulanand, N., RameshBabu, A., & Rajesh, P. K. (2020). Enriched learning experience using augmented reality framework in engineering education. *Procedia Computer Science*, 172, 937–942.

15. Coimbra, M. T., Cardoso, T., & Mateus, A. (2015). Augmented reality: An enhancer for higher education students in math's learning? *Procedia Computer Science*, 67, 332–339.

16. Hincapie, M., Diaz, C., Valencia, A., Contero, M., & Güemes-Castorena, D. (2021). Educational applications of augmented reality: A bibliometric study. *Computers and Electrical Engineering*, 93, 1–11.

17. Sidani, A., Matoseiro Dinis, F., Duarte, J., Sanhudo, L., Calvetti, D., Santos Baptista, J., Poças Martins, J., & Soeiro, A. (2021). Recent tools and techniques of BIM-based augmented reality: A systematic review. *Journal of Building Engineering*, 42, 1–13.

18. Lin, H. C. K., Chen, M. C., & Chang, C. K. (2015). Assessing the effectiveness of learning solid geometry by using an augmented reality-assisted learning system. *Interactive Learning Environments*, 23(6), 799–810.

19. Su, W. H., Chen, K. Y., Lu, L. Y. Y., & Huang, Y. C. (2021). Identification of technology diffusion by citation and main paths analysis: The possibility of measuring open innovation. *Journal of Open Innovation: Technology, Market, and Complexity*, 7(1), 1–22.

20. Ahmad, N. I. N., & Junaini, S. N. (2020). Augmented reality for learning mathematics: A systematic literature review. *International Journal of Emerging Technologies in Learning*, 15(16), 106–122.

21. Giannopulu, I., Brotto, G., Lee, T. J., Frangos, A., & To, D. (2022). Synchronised neural signature of creative mental imagery in reality and augmented reality. *Heliyon*, 8(3), 1–13.

22. Jessen, A., Hilken, T., Chylinski, M., Mahr, D., Heller, J., Keeling, D. I., & de Ruyter, K. (2020). The playground effect: How augmented reality drives creative customer engagement. *Journal of Business Research*, 116, 85–98.

23. AlFadalat, M., & Al-Azhari, W. (2022). An integrating contextual approach using architectural procedural modeling and augmented reality in residential buildings: The case of Amman City. *Heliyon*, 8(8), 1–15.

24. Fiskerstrand, A. (2022). Literature review—Parent involvement and mathematic outcome. *Educational Research Review*, 37, 1–16.

25. Maybury, L., Corcoran, P., & Cipcigan, L. (2022). Mathematical modelling of electric vehicle adoption: A systematic literature review. *Transportation Research*, 107, 1–20.

26. National Council of Teacher of Mathematics. (2000). *Principles and standards for school mathematics*. The National Council of Teachers of Mathematics, Inc.

27. Saidin, N. F., Halim, N. D. A., & Yahaya, N. (2015). A review of research on augmented reality in education: Advantages and applications. *International Education Studies*, 8(13), 1–8.

28. Sejzi, A. A. (2015). Augmented reality and virtual learning environment. *Journal of Applied Sciences Research*, 11(8), 1–5.

29. Sannikov, S., Zhdanov, F., Chebotarev, P., & Rabinovich, P. (2015). Interactive educational content based on augmented reality and 3D visualization. *Procedia Computer Science*, 66, 720–729.

30. Ahn, H., & Choi, Y. (2015). Analysis on the effect of the augmented reality-based STEAM program on education. *Advanced Science and Technology Letters*, 92, 125–130.

31. Radu, I., Doherty, E., Diquollo, K., Mccarthy, B., & Tiu, M. (2015). Cyberchase shape quest: Pushing geometry education boundaries with augmented reality. In *Proceedings of the 14th international conference on interaction design and children* (pp. 430–433).

32. Kiat, L. B., Ali, M. B., Halim, N. D. A., & Ibrahim, H. B. (2016). Augmented reality, virtual learning environment and mobile learning in education: A comparison. In *2016 IEEE conference on e-learning, e-management and e-services (IC3e)* (pp. 23–28).

33. Oh, Y.-J., Suh, Y.-S., & Kim, E.-K. (2016). Picture puzzle augmented reality system for infants creativity. In *2016 Eighth international conference on ubiquitous and future networks (ICUFN)* (pp. 343–346).

34. Buchori, A., Setyosari, P., Dasna, I. W., & Ulfa, S. (2016). Developing character building learning model using mobile augmented reality on elementary school student in central Java. *Global Journal of Pure and Applied Mathematics*, 12(4), 3433–3444.

35. Tekederea, H., & Göker, H. (2016). Examining the effectiveness of augmented reality applications in education: A meta-analysis. *International Journal of Environmental and Science Education*, 11(16), 9469–9481.

36. Albayrak, M., Altıntaş, V., Sümen, A. M., & Şener, G. (2016). Robotics education based on augmented reality in primary schools. In *3rd International conference on advanced technology and sciences* (pp. 1–6).

37. Giasiranis, S., & Sofos, L. (2016). Production and evaluation of educational material using augmented reality for teaching the module of "representation of the information on computers" in junior high school. *Creative Education*, 7(09), 1270–1291.

38. Yilmaz, R. M., & Goktas, Y. (2016). Using augmented reality technology in storytelling activities: Examining elementary students' narrative skill and creativity. *Virtual Reality*, 21(2), 75–89.

39. Saltan, F., & Arslan, Ö. (2017). The use of augmented reality in formal education: A scoping review. *Eurasia Journal of Mathematics, Science and Technology Education*, 13(2), 503–520.

40. Salinas, P., & Pulido, R. (2017). Understanding the conics through augmented reality. *Eurasia Journal of Mathematics, Science and Technology Education*, 13(2), 341–354.

41. Cascales-Martínez, A., Martínez-Segura, M. J., Pérez-López, D., & Contero, M. (2017). Using an augmented reality enhanced tabletop system to promote learning of mathematics: A case study with students with special educational needs. *Eurasia Journal of Mathematics, Science and Technology Education*, 13(2), 355–380.

42. Sanabria, J. C., & Arámburo-Lizárraga, J. (2017). Enhancing 21st century skills with AR: Using the gradual immersion method to develop collaborative creativity. *Eurasia Journal of Mathematics, Science and Technology Education*, 13(2), 487–501.

43. Zhu, Y., Yang, X., & Wang, S. J. (2017). Augmented reality meets tangibility: A new approach for early childhood education. *EAI Endorsed Transactions on Creative Technologies*, 4(11), 1–8.

44. Buchori, A., Setyosari, P., Dasna, I. W., Ulfa, S., Degeng, I. N. S., & Sa'dijah, C. (2017). Effectiveness of direct instruction learning strategy assisted by mobile augmented reality and achievement motivation on students' cognitive learning results. *Asian Social Science*, 13(9), 137–144.

45. Martin-Gutierrez, J. (2017). Learning strategies in engineering education using virtual and augmented reality technologies. *Eurasia Journal of Mathematics, Science and Technology Education*, 13(2), 297–300.

46. Le, H.-Q., & Ki, J.-I. (2017). An augmented reality application with hand gestures for learning 3D geometry. In *2017 IEEE international conference on big data and smart computing (BigComp)* (pp. 34–41).

47. Chen, P., Liu, X., Cheng, W., & Huang, R. (2017). A review of using augmented reality in education from 2011 to 2016. In *Innovations in smart learning* (pp. 13–18).

48. Hsu, Y. S., Lin, Y. H., & Yang, B. (2017). Impact of augmented reality lessons on students' STEM interest. *Research and Practice in Technology Enhanced Learning*, 12(1), 1–14.

49. Papanastasiou, G., Drigas, A., Skianis, C., Lytras, M., & Papanastasiou, E. (2018). Virtual and augmented reality effects on K-12, higher and tertiary education students' twenty-first century skills. *Virtual Reality*, 23(4), 425–436.

50. Chandrasekera, T., & Yoon, S.-Y. (2018). Augmented reality, virtual reality and their effect on learning style in the creative design process. *Design and Technology Education: An International Journal*, 23(1), 55–75.

51. Pritami, F. A., & Muhimmah, I. (2018). Digital game based learning using augmented reality for mathematics learning. In *ICSCA 2018: Proceedings of the 2018 7th international conference on software and computer applications* (pp. 254–258).

52. Raghaw, M., Paulose, J., & Goswami, B. (2018). Augmented reality for history education. *International Journal of Engineering and Technology*, 7(2), 121–125.

53. Kiryakova, G., Angelova, N., & Yordanova, L. (2018). The potential of augmented reality to transform education into Smart education. *TEM Journal*, 7(3), 556–565.

54. Chao, W.-H., & Chang, R.-C. (2018). Using augmented reality to enhance and engage students in learning mathematics. *Advances in Social Sciences Research Journal*, 5(12), 455–464.

55. Isti'aroh, B. I., Ismail, Z. R. W., & Falaq, F. I. (2018). The victory of culture games (VOC-games): Math-based learning media 3D and augmented reality as a conservation culture. In *Advances in social science, education and humanities research (ASSEHR)* (pp. 23–25).

56. Agustina, W. W., Sumarto, S., & Trisno, B. (2019). Augmented reality based on stem for supporting science literacy in vocational education. *Journal of Physics: Conference Series*, 1375(1), 1–10.

57. Sarkar, P., Sakhardande, P., Oza, U., & Pillai, J. (2019). Study of augmented reality interaction mediums (AIMs) towards collaboratively solving open-ended problems. In *27th International conference on computers in education conference (ICCE 2019)*.

58. Tzima, S., Styliaras, G., & Bassounas, A. (2019). Augmented reality applications in education: Teachers' point of view. *Education Sciences*, 9(2), 1–18.

59. Ruhaiyem, N. I. R., & Kei, L. H. (2019). Teaching complex mathematics operation using augmented reality. In *Proceedings of the international university carnival on e-learning 2019* (pp. 10–11).

60. Al-Azawi, R., Albadi, A., Moghaddas, R., & Westlake, J. (2019). Exploring the potential of using augmented reality and virtual reality for STEM education. In *International workshop on learning technology for education in cloud (LTEC 2019)* (Vol. 1011, pp. 36–44).

61. Aldalalah, O., Ababneh, Z. W. M., Bawaneh, A. K., & Alzubi, W. M. M. (2019). Effect of augmented reality and simulation on the achievement of mathematics and visual thinking among students. *International Journal of Emerging Technologies in Learning*, 14(18), 164–185.

62. Silva, M., Roberto, R., Radu, I., & Cavalcante, P. (2019). Why don't we see more of augmented reality in schools? In *2019 IEEE international symposium on mixed and augmented reality adjunct (ISMAR-Adjunct)* (pp. 138–143).

63. Herrera, L. M., Pérez, J. C., & Ordóñez, S. J. (2019). Developing spatial mathematical skills through 3D tools: Augmented reality, virtual environments and 3D printing. *International Journal on Interactive Design and Manufacturing*, 13(4), 1385–1399.

64. Langer, K., Lietze, S., Krizek, G. C., & Wien, F. T. (2020). Vector AR3-APP—A good-practice example of learning with augmented reality. *European Journal of Open, Distance and E-Learning*, 23(2), 51–64.

65. Pamungkas, T. D. (2020). Android-based augmented reality media and the curiosity about mathematics. *Journal of Physics: Conference Series*, 1663(1), 1–6.

66. Guntur, M. I. S., Setyaningrum, W., Retnawati, H., & Marsigit. (2020). Can augmented reality improve problem-solving and spatial skill? *Journal of Physics: Conference Series*, 1581(1), 1–8.

67. Saundarajan, K., Osman, S., Daud, M. F., Abu, M. S., Pairan, M. R., & Kumar, J. A. (2020). Learning algebra using augmented reality. *International Journal of Emerging Technologies in Learning*, 15(16), 123–133.

68. Hanid, M. F. A., Said, M. N. H. B. M., & Yahaya, N. (2020). Learning strategies using augmented reality technology in education: Meta-analysis. *Universal Journal of Educational Research*, 8(5A), 51–56.

69. Aditama, P. W., & Setiawan, I. N. A. F. (2020). Indigenous Bali on augmented reality as a creative solution in Industrial Revolution 4.0. *Journal of Physics: Conference Series*, 1471(1), 1–9.

70. Suryanti, S., Arifani, Y., & Sutaji, D. (2020). Augmented reality for integer learning: Investigating its potential on students' critical thinking. *Journal of Physics: Conference Series*, 1613(1), 1–10.

71. Wittayakhom, N., & Piriyasurawong, P. (2020). Learning management STEAM model on massive open online courses using augmented reality to enhance creativity and innovation. *Higher Education Studies*, 10(4), 44–53.

72. Rashevska, N. V., Semerikov, S. O., Zinonos, N. O., Tkachuk, V. V., & Shyshkina, M. P. (2020). Using augmented reality tools in the teaching of two-dimensional plane geometry. In *International workshop on augmented reality in education* (pp. 79–90).

73. Syafril, S., Asril, Z., Engkizar, E., Zafirah, A., Agusti, F. A., & Sugiharta, I. (2021). Designing prototype model of virtual geometry in mathematics learning using augmented reality. *IOP Conference Series: Earth and Environmental Science*, 1796(1), 1–8.

74. Sholikhah, B. U., & Cahyono, A. N. (2021). Augmented reality student worksheets for learning mathematics during the COVID-19 pandemic. *Journal of Physics: Conference Series*, 1918(4), 1–6.

75. Yousef, A. M. F. (2021). Augmented reality assisted learning achievement, motivation, and creativity for children of low-grade in primary school. *Journal of Computer Assisted Learning*, 37(4), 966–977.

76. Salako, O., Ugwunna, C., Folorunso, O., & Adejimi, A. (2021). Art education post-COVID-19: Augmented reality technology application in building students' creativity skills. In *4th International conference on information technology in education and development* (pp. 34–37).

77. Hamzah, M. L., Ambiyar, A., Rizal, F., Simatupang, W., Irfan, D., & Refdinal, R. (2021). Development of augmented reality application for learning computer network device. *International Journal of Interactive Mobile Technologies*, 15(12), 47–64.

78. Palanci, A., & Turan, Z. (2021). How does the use of the augmented reality technology in mathematics education affect learning processes? A systematic review. *International Journal of Curriculum and Instructional Studies*, 11(1), 89–110.

79. Lin, Y.-J., & Wang, H. (2022). Applying augmented reality in a university English class: Learners' perceptions of creativity and learning motivation. *Innovation in Language Learning and Teaching*, 17(2), 291–305.

80. Chen, C.-C., Chen, H.-R., & Wang, T.-Y. (2022). International forum of educational technology and society creative situated augmented reality learning for astronomy curricula. *Educational Technology and Society*, 25(2), 148–162.

81. Cui, K. (2022). Artificial intelligence and creativity: Piano teaching with augmented reality applications. *Interactive Learning Environments*, 1–12.

82. Iqbal, M. Z., Mangina, E., & Campbell, A. G. (2022). Current challenges and future research directions in augmented reality for education. *Multimodal Technologies and Interaction*, 6(9), 1–29.

83. Raccanello, D., Balbontín-Alvarado, R., da Bezerra, D. S., Burro, R., Cheraghi, M., Dobrowolska, B., Fagbamigbe, A. F., Faris, M. E., França, T., González-Fernández, B., Hall, R., Inasius, F., Kar, S. K., Keržič, D., Lazányi, K., Lazăr, F., Machin-Mastromatteo, J. D., Marôco, J., Marques, B. P., ... Aristovnik, A. (2022). Higher education students' achievement emotions and their antecedents in e-learning amid COVID-19 pandemic: A multi-country survey. *Learning and Instruction*, 80, 101629.

84. Rizki, I. A., Saphira, H. V., Alfarizy, Y., Saputri, A. D., Ramadani, R., & Suprapto, N. (2023). Integration of adventure game and augmented reality based on Android in physics learning. *International Journal of Interactive Mobile Technologies*, 17(1), 4–21.

85. Gao, S., Lu, Y., Ooi, C. H., Cai, Y., & Gunawan, P. (2023). Designing interactive augmented reality application for student's directed learning of continuous distillation process. *Computers and Chemical Engineering*, 169, 1–12.

86. Yulianti, E., Mustikasari, V. R., Muhlisin, N., Rahman, N. F. A., & Phang, F. A. (2023). An augmented reality-based science book for junior high school students: Case study on environmental pollution and global warming topics. *AIP Conference Proceedings*, 2569(1), 1–8.

87. Ou Yang, F.-C., Lai, H.-M., & Wang, Y.-W. (2023). Effect of augmented reality-based virtual educational robotics on programming students' enjoyment of learning, computational thinking skills, and academic achievement. *Computers and Education*, 195, 104721.

88. Chui, T. B., Bin Ahmad, M. S., Bassim, F. B. A., & Zaimi, N. B. A. (2016). Evaluation of service quality of private higher education using service improvement matrix. *Procedia: Social and Behavioral Sciences*, 224, 132–140.

89. Buchner, J., & Kerres, M. (2023). Media comparison studies dominate comparative research on augmented reality in education. *Computers and Education*, 195, 1–12.

90. Rusli, R., Nalanda, D. A., Tarmidi, A. D. V., Suryaningrum, K. M., & Yunanda, R. (2023). Augmented reality for studying hands on the human body for elementary school students. *Procedia Computer Science*, 216, 237–244.

91. Alamsyah, D. P., Parulian, J. M., & Herliana, A. (2023). Augmented reality android based: Education of modern and traditional instruments. *Procedia Computer Science*, 216, 266–273.

92. Ronaghi, M. H., & Ronaghi, M. (2022). A contextualized study of the usage of the augmented reality technology in the tourism industry. *Decision Analytics Journal*, 5, 1–9.

93. Siddiq, F., Gochyyev, P., & Valls, O. (2020). The role of engagement and academic behavioral skills on young students' academic performance—A validation across four countries. *Studies in Educational Evaluation*, 66, 100880.

94. Bereczki, E. O., & Kárpáti, A. (2021). Technology-enhanced creativity: A multiple case study of digital technology-integration expert teachers' beliefs and practices. *Thinking Skills and Creativity*, 39, 100791.

95. Revolti, A., Dallasega, P., Schulze, F., & Walder, A. (2023). Augmented reality to support the maintenance of urban-line infrastructures: A case study. *Procedia Computer Science*, 217, 746–755.