# Application of Augmented Reality on Chemistry Learning: A Systematic Review

## Abstract

The rapid development of technology in the world of education has many positive impacts, namely facilitating the learning process. Technological sophistication can be felt, one of which is augmented reality. This Augmented Reality concept collaborates the real world with the virtual world which can display more detailed information in 3D visuals. This systematic review analysis study was conducted to classify the application of augmented reality in chemistry learning. The main criteria for the selection of journals was the implementation of augmented reality in the field of chemistry education with a period ranging from 2015 to 2022 from international databases. There were 74 journals obtained that fit into the criteria. Journal studies focused on the application of AR chemistry materials at the high school and university levels. The studies analyzed focused on the form of applying AR in chemistry learning, applied chemistry, chemical material, and sample level. The results of the study show that the application of AR in chemistry learning is often presented in the form of android-based learning; organic chemistry is widely applied using AR. In addition, an explanation of the application of chemical concepts and sample groups is also discussed here.

**Keywords:** Augmented reality; Chemical concepts; Chemistry learning

## Introduction

The rapid development of technology in the world of education has many positive impacts, namely facilitating the learning process. Technological sophistication can be felt, one of which is augmented reality. The concept of Augmented Reality collaborates the real world with the virtual world which can display more detailed information in 3D visuals [1,2]. The advantage of this AR technology is that it can enter information into the virtual world and then it can be displayed in the real world with the help of special tools [3,4], usually in the form of cameras, computers, webcams, and even using special AR glasses.

The use of media in learning can improve memory [5–7], improve the effectiveness and quality of learning [8,9]. Therefore, the nature of learning media is very important to help students in the learning process with or without educators in the educational process [10,11]. Learning media is becoming more interesting and more concise even though it does not reduce the essence of the material. Utilization of educational media with Augmented Reality can directly provide learning wherever and whenever students want to carry out the learning process [12–14].

Connecting learning with the real world is one of the objectives of implementing augmented reality which is focused on attracting students' interest in learning. Moreover, when it comes to understanding chemistry, often students are less motivated in learning it. Chemical material is often avoided because it is labeled as material that is abstract and complex, so it requires high-level reasoning and thinking which causes learning difficulties for students [15–17]. Therefore, almost all chemistry lessons are difficult, abstract, and complex so they require high-level reasoning and thinking [18–20].

Additionally, the main cause of the lack of student learning motivation is the use of less effective learning media; less involving students in the learning process [21–23]; lack of skills to apply knowledge; lack of teacher's ability to convey scientific information effectively using various media. Several things that the teacher must pay attention to are the application of learning media according to the needs of the subjects and the needs of students [24–26]; learning media must be able to facilitate students to develop their ability to solve problems optimally [27–30] so that students can be creative and not get bored in the process of solving problems and understanding learning material.

Based on several studies, the application of augmented reality is quite popular in chemistry learning. The explanation of Chuang et al. [31] regarding the proper use of augmented reality in the learning process can increase learning motivation, learning achievement and effectiveness in learning. Therefore, this practicality can increase the level of use of augmented reality so that its application is popular in education. Currently, popularity and application in chemistry learning, the forms and models of augmented reality that are offered are quite diverse. Recently, there have been quite a number of systematic literature reviews (SLR) investigating the use of AR in education.

For example, the SLR presented by Garzón et al. [32] analyzed the impact of AR on learning effectiveness. Other SLR have a more specific purpose, as was done by da Silva et al. [33] where the authors try to show how AR has been evaluated in education. Akçayır et al. [34] highlight which AR technologies are most often used for educational purposes, while Radu [35] analyzed articles comparing applications with or without AR use. However, there is no research that focuses on the SLR application of AR in chemistry learning. Most AR SLR provide general educational explanations. Therefore, there is a need for systematic research related to the application of AR in chemistry learning to analyze what chemical concepts are commonly applied using AR, so that it can be used as a reference for teachers, prospective teachers, and others.

The purpose of this research is to synthesize the application of augmented reality focusing on chemistry learning from 2015 to 2022. The issues raised in this research are: How is the application of augmented reality in chemistry learning, what fields of chemistry can augmented reality apply to, how is the distribution of augmented reality studies based on chemistry concepts and who are the samples involved in this study.

## Method

### Research Design

This study uses a systematic review analysis. This is done to synthesize and find studies that explain related to Augmented Reality in chemistry learning. The procedure is to determine the topic, then determine the inclusion and exclusion criteria and do content analysis, then do the coding, then synthesize and present findings based on literature that is relevant to the research topic.

### Data Collection

The researcher determines the topic and looks for the keywords of the journal to be synthesized. This research focuses on the application of AR in chemistry learning. The journals used are international journals that have been indexed by Scopus through the Google Scholar database and Research Gate with the keywords used namely "Augmented Reality in chemistry learning", "Augmented Reality in high school chemistry learning", "Augmented Reality in university chemistry learning". During the search process, certain data ranges are applied in the years 2015-2022.

The journals used in the synthesis were searched based on inclusion criteria: 1) chemistry-based AR, 2) concentrated on cognitive, affective and psychomotor aspects, 3) dealing with chemistry topics at the university level, such as organic chemistry, inorganic chemistry, pharmaceuticals, 4) dealing with chemistry topics at the high school level, 5) journals explaining in English, 6) indexed journals or proceedings. For example Tee et al. [36] who describes the development and application of AR based on chemistry in colorimetric titration material in learning or Plunkett [37] who discusses AR on the topic of organic chemistry in English.

Meanwhile, the exceptions used are matters that do not discuss the application of AR in chemistry learning (in the fields of mechanical engineering, interior design, learning mathematics, biology, physics and others), do not apply AR in chemistry learning at high school and university levels. For example, Scaravetti et al. [38] who apply AR in learning, but the material taught is in the form of mechanical design material, or Yilmaz [39] which discusses the application of AR in early childhood education which is not the focus of research.

### Data Analysis

Journals included in the criteria will be identified and analyzed to be presented in a systematic review. A systematic review method is carried out to examine relevant research topics in various journals. This journal review is focused on the application of AR in chemistry learning, to see which chemical materials are often applied using AR. In addition, to see the form of applying AR in learning, whether in the form of games, virtual laboratories and others. Coding is done by assigning numbers in sequence along with file names to make it easier for researchers to classify and analyze the journals to be synthesized.

### Research Validity and Reliability

In ensuring the journal used meets the inclusion criteria, two peer assessments were carried out to check the suitability of the journal with the existing criteria. There were 290 journals whose content the researchers analyzed and found 74 journals that met the criteria according to peer assessment. Next, the author continues coding all journals that have passed the criteria. Coding is done by focusing on the abstract; if the abstract has met the criteria, then it will continue with full attention to the entire contents of the journal. Coding results are conceptualized, listed and grouped based on the problems and information needed.

## Result and Discussion

### Results of the Application of AR

The form of applying Augmented Reality in chemistry learning is divided into five codes. The form of applying AR in Android-based chemistry learning gets the highest frequency consisting of thirty-seven articles that apply this form. The computer-based implementation form consists of seventeen articles, then the virtual laboratory-based application consists of fourteen articles; there are other forms of application such as web-based which consists of three articles, and the last is the game-based AR implementation form which consists of three articles. The frequency codes for applying AR in chemistry learning are presented in **TABLE 1**.

**TABLE 1.** The Frequency of the Application of Augmented Reality in Chemistry Learning

| Code | f |
| :--- | :---: |
| Web based learning | 3 |
| Game based learning | 3 |
| Android based learning | 37 |
| Computer based learning | 17 |
| Laboratory based learning | 14 |
| **Total** | **74** |

### Results of the Application of AR in Chemistry

The field of chemistry that is applied using Augmented Reality is divided into six codes: the field of organic chemistry has the highest frequency consisting of twenty-six articles that apply AR. The biochemistry code consists of fifteen articles, the inorganic chemistry code consists of eleven articles, the analytical chemistry code consists of nine articles, the basic chemistry code consists of nine articles, and finally the physical chemistry code consists of four articles that apply AR. The frequency of chemical field codes applied using AR is presented in **TABLE 2**.

**TABLE 2.** Frequency of Chemical Fields Applied using AR

| Code | f |
| :--- | :---: |
| AR integration on analytical chemistry subjects | 9 |
| AR integration on organic chemistry subjects | 26 |
| AR integration on general chemistry subjects | 9 |
| AR integration on biochemistry subjects | 15 |
| AR integration on physical chemistry subjects | 4 |
| AR integration on inorganic chemistry subjects | 11 |
| **Total** | **74** |

### Results of Chemistry Concept

The study of the frequency of augmented reality distribution codes based on chemicals is presented in **TABLE 3**. Based on the results of **TABLE 3** it can be seen that there are 137 chemical concepts discussed in the 74 journals analyzed. The distribution of AR in chemical concepts is divided into twenty-one codes. The highest frequency is the concept of molecular structure which consists of twenty-eight articles. The stereochemistry code consists of twenty-two articles. The molecular geometry code consists of seventeen articles. The code of molecular orbital theory consists of fourteen articles. The macromolecular code consists of thirteen articles. The chemical reaction code consists of eleven articles. The VSEPR code consists of five articles. The carbon code consists of four articles. The acid-base code, NMR spectroscopy, and crystal structure each consist of three articles. Titration codes, pH meters, laboratory safety, and redox reactions each consist of two articles. Codes of chemical indicators, enzyme kinetics, medicinal chemistry, electrochemistry, reaction rates, and polymerization each consist of one journal. Overall, a total of 137 chemistry concepts were discussed in the 74 journals analyzed.

**TABLE 3.** Frequency Distribution of AR in Chemistry Concept

| Code | f | Code | f |
| :--- | :---: | :--- | :---: |
| Acid-Base | 3 | Geometry of Molecules | 17 |
| VSEPR | 5 | Hydrocarbon | 4 |
| Stereochemistry | 22 | Laboratory Safety | 2 |
| Titration | 2 | Enzyme Kinetics | 1 |
| Chemical Indicators | 1 | Medicinal Chemistry | 1 |
| pH meter | 2 | Redox Reaction | 2 |
| Molecular Structures | 28 | Electrochemistry | 1 |
| Chemical Reaction | 11 | Reaction Rate | 1 |
| | | Molecular Orbital Theory | 14 |
| | | Polymerization | 1 |
| | | Macromolecules | 13 |
| | | NMR Spectroscopy | 3 |
| | | Crystal Structure | 3 |
| **Total** | **137** | **Total** | **137** |

### Results of Sample Levels

The frequency of coding at the sample level of applying AR in chemistry learning is presented in **TABLE 4**. Based on the results of the table it can be seen that there were seventy-nine samples obtained from seventy-four journals because several journals applied AR to two different samples in one journal. Thus, a total of thirty-four journals used a university-level sample. This is because most journals discuss material at the university level. Then as many as thirty-three journals used the high school level sample, six journals used the chemistry teacher sample. The lecturer sample code consists of two journals and the last four journals are not known using the sample level because the journals analyzed do not mention samples.

**TABLE 4.** Sample Rate Frequency of Applying AR in Chemistry Learning

| Code | | f |
| :--- | :--- | :---: |
| Students | University | 34 |
| | Senior high school | 33 |
| Chemistry teacher | | 6 |
| Lecturer | | 2 |
| Not mentioned | | 4 |
| **Total** | | **79** |

## Discussion

The results of the analysis carried out explain the form of application, distribution of chemical fields, the concept of distribution of chemicals, and the level of samples used. The most widely used frequency of AR application in chemistry learning is android-based (see **TABLE 1**). Generally, the application of AR is mostly in the industrial machinery and interior design fields which are designed through computer programs. The development of AR can now be used with special AR glasses, and the web, and it's even more practical to use Android. Sahida et al. [12] in his journal explains the purpose of implementing AR in learning is to improve the learning process and students' interest in learning because AR itself has entertainment aspects that can increase students' interest in learning and playing and projecting it in real terms and involving the interaction of all the five senses of students with this AR technology.

In addition, An et al. [3] used AR in learning to cultivate students' general attitudes about working with instruments in chemical laboratories. Therefore, students' interest and scientific attitude can increase in studying chemistry. Apart from being skilled in chemistry concepts, students can also be skilled at getting to know the instruments in the laboratory virtually. For example, Alfaro et al. [40] discussed the application of Android-based AR with acid-base titration chemicals in the form of a virtual laboratory. In these learning activities, students conduct virtual acid-base titration experiments. Even if you only use Android, it doesn't take away the essence of learning like in a real laboratory.

The virtual laboratory is designed the same as the real laboratory, as well as the tools and materials used are adapted to the tools and materials needed for acid-base titration experiments. This is by Tee et al. [36] where the application of AR using android is more practical and does not eliminate the essence of learning as in a real laboratory. In addition, Tarng et al. [41] explained the application of AR with inquiry-based learning in electrochemical material to acquire chemical knowledge and concepts during the learning process and is very helpful for improving scientific thinking and learning.

The highest frequency of chemistry applied to AR is found in the organic chemistry code (see **TABLE 2**). Research by Aw et al. [42] shows that students find organic chemistry a challenging material because it is difficult to imagine abstract concepts without seeing atoms, molecules, and ions in an invisible 3D world and it is difficult to see their dynamic motion, interactions, and kinetics. Therefore, the application of virtual experiments in the field of organic chemistry is the most widely applied. In line with that, Whatoni et al. [43] explained that the application of AR in the field of organic chemistry allows students to observe the shapes of molecular structures and see the movement of electrons and ions which are useful for understanding abstract concepts and principles in molecular structures. For example, Broman et al. [44] students view molecules in 3D through AR glasses and then draw the Lewis structure of the molecule. Most students find it very helpful to visualize molecules and to understand organic chemistry more deeply. In addition, Dunnagan et al. [45] explained the use of AR as a virtual organic chemistry laboratory that can make students experience understanding organic chemistry material virtually.

The most widely used frequency in the code for applying AR in chemical concepts is found in the molecular structure code (see **TABLE 3**). Based on the results of **TABLE 3**, it can be seen that there are 137 chemical concepts discussed in the 74 journals analyzed. The distribution of AR in chemical concepts is divided into twenty-one codes. What's more, there are three highest chemical concept codes in the molecular structure code consisting of twenty-eight journals, the second stereochemical code consisting of twenty-two journals, and the third code of molecular geometry consisting of seventeen journals.

This explanation by Hilda et al. [46] that most chemical material is abstract and difficult to understand without practice. In addition, Ewais et al. [47] explained that AR can display possible reactions between two atoms and will present the formed molecule as a 3D object by placing the two markers close together and will display whether there is a possibility of interaction between the two atoms. The concept codes for chemical indicators, enzyme kinetics, medicinal chemistry, electrochemistry, reaction rates, and polymerization each consisting of one journal. This means, there is still little research that applies AR to these chemical concepts.

The sample level code frequencies are presented in **TABLE 4**. Based on the results of the table it can be seen that there were seventy-nine samples obtained from seventy-four journals, because some journals apply AR to two different samples in one journal. Meanwhile, the sample level consists of five different codes. The first code is a university student, the second code is a high school student, the third code is a chemistry teacher, the fourth code is a lecturer and the last is a sample code that is not mentioned in the journal. The highest frequency of the university student code consisted of thirty-four journals, the high school student code consisted of thirty-three journals, the chemistry teacher code consisted of six journals, the lecturer code consisted of two journals and as many as four journals did not mention the level and were coded without mentioning it.

Research Gan et al. [48] showed similar results where research using AR was more widely used at the level of students who had a higher level of difficulty understanding chemical concepts, so it was very necessary to apply AR in their learning. Besides this, the application of AR has also developed a lot at the high school level. For example, Rahmawati et al. [49] applied AR at the high school level explaining stereochemical material to improve students' cognitive levels, attitudes and spatial abilities. Besides that, the application of AR to chemistry teachers at Astuti et al. [50] to improve chemistry teachers' technological literacy.

According to this study, the form of application in the field of chemistry that is used must be in accordance with the needs and facilities that support the learning process of chemistry. Besides that, whatever form of application of AR in chemistry learning, it must be adapted to the material and chemistry concepts to be taught. For example, the need for experiments in a laboratory that is not yet possible due to limited materials and tools, AR can be used in the form of a virtual laboratory. The possibility of research that can be carried out to be analyzed in future research is related to the field of chemistry and chemical concepts applied by AR in more detail and depth, because this is still very little discussed in this journal.

## Conclusion

Augmented reality is a popular technology in various fields, especially in education. Its application in chemistry learning is considered appropriate because it can increase learning motivation, learning achievement and effectiveness in the learning process. Along with its popularity and application in chemistry learning, the forms and models of augmented reality that are offered are quite diverse. According to this study, the application of AR in chemistry learning is often presented in the form of android-based learning; this is in accordance with the advantages in practicality. In addition, AR is often applied to the field of organic chemistry with the concept of molecular structure at the university level. This research can be used as a reference for other researchers, teachers and prospective teachers in choosing and estimating chemical material that will be applied using augmented reality appropriately in learning.

## References

1. A. Abuhammad, J. Falah, S. F. M. Alfalah, M. Abu-Tarboush, R. T. Tarawneh, D. Drikakis, and V. Charissis, " 'MedChemVR': A virtual reality game to enhance medicinal chemistry education," *Multimodal Technologies and Interaction*, vol. 5, no. 3, p. 10, 2021. doi: 10.3390/mti5030010.

2. A. Ayoub and Y. Pulijala, "The application of virtual reality and augmented reality in oral & maxillofacial surgery," *BMC Oral Health*, vol. 19, no. 238, pp. 1-8, 2019. doi: 10.1186/s12903-019-0937-8.

3. J. An, L.-P. Poly, and T. A. Holme, "Usability testing and the development of an augmented reality application for laboratory learning," *Journal of Chemical Education*, vol. 97, no. 1, pp. 97-105, 2020. doi: 10.1021/acs.jchemed.9b00453.

4. D. Elford, S. J. Lancaster, and G. A. Jones, "Exploring the effect of augmented reality on cognitive load, attitude, spatial ability, and stereochemical perception," *Journal of Science Education and Technology*, vol. 31, no. 3, pp. 322-339, 2022. doi: 10.1007/s10956-022-09957-0.

5. F. Botella, A. Peñalver, and F. Borrás, "Evaluating the usability and acceptance of an AR app in learning chemistry for secondary education," in *Proceedings of the XIX International Conference on Human Computer Interaction*, 2018, pp. 1-8. doi: 10.1145/3233824.3233838.

6. J. Martín-Gutiérrez, C. E. Mora, B. Añorbe-Díaz, and A. González-Marrero, "Virtual technologies trends in education," *Eurasia Journal of Mathematics, Science and Technology Education*, vol. 13, no. 2, pp. 469-486, 2017. doi: 10.12973/eurasia.2017.00626a.

7. E. Untari, "Problematika dan pemanfaatan media pembelajaran sekolah dasar di Kota Blitar," *Jurnal Pendidikan Dasar Perkhasa*, vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 259-270, 2017. doi: 10.31932/jpdp.v3i1.41.

8. M. Frevert and D.-S. Di Fuccia, "Virtual reality as a means of teaching contemporary chemistry," in *Proceedings of the 2019 The 3rd International Conference on Digital Technology in Education*, 2019, pp. 34-38. doi: 10.1145/3369199.3369218.

9. R. Winda and F. Dafit, "Analisis kesulitan guru dalam penggunaan media pembelajaran online di sekolah dasar," *Jurnal Pedagogi Dan Pembelajaran*, vol. 4, no. 2, p. 211, 2021. doi: 10.23887/jp2.v4i2.38941.

10. J. A. Naese, D. McAteer, K. D. Hughes, C. Kelbon, A. Mugweru, and J. P. Grinias, "Use of augmented reality in the instruction of analytical instrumentation design," *Journal of Chemical Education*, vol. 96, no. 3, pp. 593-596, 2019. doi: 10.1021/acs.jchemed.8b00794.

11. A. Risabethe and B. Astuti, "Pengembangan media pembelajaran untuk meningkatkan motivasi belajar dan karakter semangat kebangsaan siswa kelas V SD," *Jurnal Pendidikan Karakter*, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 34-45, 2017. doi: 10.21831/jpk.v7i1.15498.

12. F. Sahida, Y. Nurfaizal, and R. Waluyo, "Pemanfaatan augmented reality sebagai media pembelajaran protozoa," *Journal of Innovation Information Technology and Application (JINITA)*, vol. 2, no. 02, pp. 99-106, 2020. doi: 10.35970/jinita.v2i2.291.

13. M. C. Lam, H. K. Tee, S. S. Muhammad Nizam, N. C. Hashim, N. A. Suwadi, S. Y. Tan, N. A. Abd Majid, H. Arshad, and S. Y. Liew, "Interactive augmented reality with natural action for chemistry experiment learning," *TEM Journal*, vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 351-360, 2020. doi: 10.18421/TEM91-48.

14. N. Zhang, Q. Liu, X. Zheng, L. Luo, and Y. Cheng, "Analysis of social interaction and behavior patterns in the process of online to offline lesson study: A case study of chemistry teaching design based on augmented reality," *Asia Pacific Journal of Education*, vol. 42, no. 4, pp. 815-836, 2022. doi: 10.1080/02188791.2020.1866493.

15. S.-Y. Chen and S.-Y. Liu, "Using augmented reality to experiment with elements in a chemistry course," *Computers in Human Behavior*, vol. 111, p. 106418, 2020. doi: 10.1016/j.chb.2020.106418.

16. J. Extremera, D. Vergara, L. P. Dávila, and M. P. Rubio, "Virtual and augmented reality environments to learn the fundamentals of crystallography," *Crystals*, vol. 10, no. 6, p. 456, 2020. doi: 10.3390/cryst10060456.

17. M. K. Sarabi and K. A. Gafoor, "Student perception on nature of subjects: Impact on difficulties in learning high school physics, chemistry and biology," *Innovations and Researches in Education*, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 42-55, 2018. [Online]. Available: http://files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/ED617654.pdf

18. S. Rahman, N. I. Ischak, and M. Sihaloho, "Identifikasi kesulitan siswa dalam memahami konsep hubungan konfigurasi elektron dengan sistem periodik unsur," *Jurnal Entropi*, vol. 11, pp. 185-189, 2016. [Online]. Available: https://media.neliti.com/media/publications/277657-identifikasi-kesulitan-siswa-dalam-memah-791ef436.pdf

19. F. C. Rodríguez, G. Frattini, L. F. Krapp, H. Martinez-Hung, D. M. Moreno, M. Roldán, J. Salomón, L. Stemkoski, S. Traeger, M. Dal Peraro, and L. A. Abriata, "MolecularWeb: A web site for chemistry and structural biology education through interactive augmented reality out of the box in commodity devices," *Journal of Chemical Education*, vol. 98, no. 7, pp. 2243-2255, 2021. doi: 10.1021/acs.jchemed.1c00179.

20. L. Wright and M. Oliver-Hoyo, "Development and evaluation of the H NMR molecular application," *Journal of Chemical Education*, vol. 98, no. 2, pp. 478-488, 2021. doi: 10.1021/acs.jchemed.0c01068.

21. S. Keller, S. Rumann, and S. Habig, "Cognitive load implications for augmented reality supported chemistry learning," *Information*, vol. 12, no. 3, p. 96, 2021. doi: 10.3390/info12030096.

22. M. Nazar, R. Aisyi, R. F. I. Rahmayani, L. Hanum, R. Rusman, K. Puspita, and M. Hidayat, "Development of augmented reality application for learning the concept of molecular geometry," *Journal of Physics: Conference Series*, vol. 1460, no. 1, p. 012083, 2020. doi: 10.1088/1742-6596/1460/1/012083.

23. N. Supriono and F. Rozi, "Pengembangan media pembelajaran bentuk molekul kimia menggunakan augmented reality berbasis android," *JIPI (Jurnal Ilmiah Penelitian Dan Pembelajaran Informatika)*, vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 53-61, 2018. doi: 10.29100/jipi.v3i1.652.

24. L. A. Abriata, "Building blocks for commodity augmented reality-based molecular visualization and modeling in web browsers," *PeerJ Computer Science*, vol. 2, 2020. doi: 10.7717/peerj-cs.260.

25. L. Nuraini and D. Ratnawati, "Pemanfaatan teknologi augmented reality untuk pengembangan bahan ajar materi komputer jaringan," *Jurnal Edukasi Elektro*, vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 111-119, 2021. doi: 10.21831/jee.v5i2.43517.

26. M. Suleman, K. H. Sugiyarto, and J. Ikhsan, "Development of media three-dimensional (3D) visualization using virtual reality on chemistry education," *Journal of Physics: Conference Series*, vol. 1397, no. 1, p. 012034, 2019. doi: 10.1088/1742-6596/1397/1/012034.

27. M.-H. Chiu, C.-C. Chou, Y.-H. Chen, T. Hung, W.-T. Tang, J.-W. Hsu, H. L. Liaw, and M.-K. Tsai, "Model-based learning about structures and properties of chemical elements and compounds via the use of augmented realities," *Chemistry Teacher International*, vol. 1, no. 1, 2019. doi: 10.1515/cti-2018-0002.

28. M. Ovens, M. Ellyard, J. Hawkins, and D. Spagnoli, "Developing an augmented reality application in an undergraduate DNA precipitation experiment to link macroscopic and submicroscopic levels of chemistry," *Journal of Chemical Education*, vol. 97, no. 10, pp. 3882-3886, 2020. doi: 10.1021/acs.jchemed.0c00481.

29. Y. D. Puspitarini and M. Hanif, "Using learning media to increase learning motivation in elementary school," *Anatolian Journal of Education*, vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 53-60, 2019. doi: 10.29333/aje.2019.426a.

30. C. Smith and C. J. Friel, "Development and use of augmented reality models to teach medicinal chemistry," *Currents in Pharmacy Teaching and Learning*, vol. 13, no. 8, pp. 1010-1017, 2021. doi: 10.1016/j.cptl.2021.06.008.

31. C.-H. Chuang, J.-H. Lo, and Y.-K. Wu, "Integrating chatbot and augmented reality technology into biology learning during COVID-19," *Electronics*, vol. 12, no. 1, p. 222, 2023. doi: 10.3390/electronics12010222.

32. J. Garzón, J. Pavón, and S. Baldiris, "Systematic review and meta-analysis of augmented reality in educational settings," *Virtual Reality*, vol. 23, no. 4, pp. 447-459, 2019. doi: 10.1007/s10055-019-00379-9.

33. M. M. O. da Silva, J. M. X. N. Teixeira, P. S. Cavalcante, and V. Teichrieb, "Perspectives on how to evaluate augmented reality technology tools for education: A systematic review," *Journal of the Brazilian Computer Society*, vol. 25, no. 1, p. 3, 2019. doi: 10.1186/s13173-019-0084-8.

34. M. Akçayır and G. Akçayır, "Advantages and challenges associated with augmented reality for education: A systematic review of the literature," *Educational Research Review*, vol. 20, pp. 1-11, 2017. doi: 10.1016/j.edurev.2016.11.002.

35. I. Radu, "Augmented reality in education: A meta-review and cross-media analysis," *Personal and Ubiquitous Computing*, vol. 18, no. 6, pp. 1533-1543, 2014. doi: 10.1007/s00779-013-0747-y.

36. N. Y. K. Tee, H. S. Gan, J. Li, B. H.-P. Cheong, H. Y. Tan, O. W. Liew, and T. W. Ng, "Developing and demonstrating an augmented reality colorimetric titration tool," *Journal of Chemical Education*, vol. 95, no. 3, pp. 393-399, 2018. doi: 10.1021/acs.jchemed.7b00618.

37. K. N. Plunkett, "A simple and practical method for incorporating augmented reality into the classroom and laboratory," *Journal of Chemical Education*, vol. 96, no. 11, pp. 2628-2631, 2019. doi: 10.1021/acs.jchemed.9b00607.

38. D. Scaravetti and D. Doroszewski, "Augmented reality experiment in higher education, for complex system appropriation in mechanical design," *Procedia CIRP*, vol. 84, pp. 197-202, 2019. doi: 10.1016/j.procir.2019.04.284.

39. R. M. Yilmaz, "Educational magic toys developed with augmented reality technology for early childhood education," *Computers in Human Behavior*, vol. 54, pp. 240-248, 2016. doi: 10.1016/j.chb.2015.07.040.

40. J. L. D. Alfaro, S. Gantois, J. Blattgerste, R. De Croon, K. Verbert, T. Pfeiffer, and P. Van Puyvelde, "Mobile augmented reality laboratory for learning acid-base titration," *Journal of Chemical Education*, vol. 99, no. 2, pp. 531-537, 2022. doi: 10.1021/acs.jchemed.1c00894.

41. W. Tarng, Y.-J. Lin, and K.-L. Ou, "A virtual experiment for learning the principle of Daniell cell based on augmented reality," *Applied Sciences*, vol. 11, no. 2, p. 762, 2021. doi: 10.3390/app11020762.

42. J. K. Aw, K. C. Boellaard, T. K. Tan, J. Yap, Y. P. Loh, B. Colasson, É. Blanc, Y. Lam, and F. M. Fung, "Interacting with three-dimensional molecular structures using an augmented reality mobile app," *Journal of Chemical Education*, vol. 97, no. 10, pp. 3877-3881, 2020.

43. A. S. Whatoni and H. Sutrisno, "Development of a learning module supported by augmented reality on chemical bonding material to improve interest and motivation of students learning for senior high school," *Jurnal Penelitian Pendidikan IPA*, vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 2210-2218, 2022. doi: 10.29303/jppipa.v8i4.2057.

44. K. Broman, E. Mårell-Olsson, D. Johnels, and others, "Spatial ability in organic chemistry: Can virtual and augmented reality be valuable?" in *7:E Utvecklingskonferensen För Sveriges Ingenjörsutbildningar, Luleå Tekniska Universitet*, 2019, pp. 27-29. [Online]. Available: https://www.diva-portal.org/smash/get/diva2:1373903/FULLTEXT01.pdf

45. C. L. Dunnagan, D. A. Dannenberg, M. P. Cuales, A. D. Earnest, R. M. Gurnsey, and M. T. Gallardo-Williams, "Production and evaluation of a realistic immersive virtual reality organic chemistry laboratory experience: Infrared spectroscopy," *Journal of Chemical Education*, vol. 97, no. 1, pp. 258-262, 2020.

46. L. Hilda, T. H. Daulae, R. Lubis, and G. R. Arafah, "Effectiveness APMOL integrated with JMOL as technology media learning based on augmented reality in the subject of geometry molecule," *Natural Volatiles & Essential Oils*, vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 366-376, 2022. [Online]. Available: https://www.nveo.org/index.php/journal/article/download/4501/3675

47. A. Ewais and O. De Troyer, "A usability and acceptance evaluation of the use of augmented reality for learning atoms and molecules reaction by primary school female students in Palestine," *Journal of Educational Computing Research*, vol. 57, no. 7, pp. 1643-1670, 2019. doi: 10.1177/0735633119855609.

48. H. S. Gan, N. Y. K. Tee, M. R. Bin Mamtaz, K. Xiao, B. H. Cheong, O. W. Liew, and T. W. Ng, "Augmented reality experimentation on oxygen gas generation from hydrogen peroxide and bleach reaction," *Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Education*, vol. 46, no. 3, pp. 245-252, 2018. doi: 10.1002/bmb.21117.

49. Y. Rahmawati, H. Dianhar, and F. Arifin, "Analysing students' spatial abilities in chemistry learning using 3D virtual representation," *Education Sciences*, vol. 11, no. 4, p. 185, 2021. doi: 10.3390/educsci11040185.

50. A. P. Astuti, V. D. Mawarsari, H. Purnomo, and E. Sediyono, "The use of augmented reality-based learning media to develop the technology literacy of chemistry teachers in the 21st century," in *The 3rd International Conference on Mathematics and Sciences Education*, 2020, p. 020002. doi: 10.1063/5.0000745.