# Understanding News-Related User Comments and Their Effects: A Systematic Review

## Abstract

There has been growing interest in research on news-related user comments. Here we conduct the first systematic review of this literature—quantitatively and qualitatively (248 studies)—that covers the entire communication process (content analyses, surveys, experiments). Results indicate a focus on online news articles (vs. videos) and little consideration for major social media platforms (Instagram, TikTok). Research often assesses incivility in comments but offers conflicting conclusions on the actual level of incivility in comment threads—and seldom considers how to effectively combat any incivility. We propose four priorities for future work: more comparative and longitudinal approaches; exploring social media and video content; examining platform design, content moderation and artificial intelligence; and implementing measures to reduce incivility and protect the integrity of journalism.

## Keywords

user comments, digital news, content analysis, media effects, uncivil user comments

## Introduction

User-generated content (UGC) represents an ever-increasing proportion of media content where users evaluate, disseminate and comment on news [1,2]. User comments are the most prominent form of UGC and user participation [3] and are usually presented below news articles, thus reaching the same audience as professionally journalistic content [4].

From the perspective of democratic theory, user participation in comment sections was welcomed in the early 2000s, when online newspapers included user comments underneath news content [5]. By 2013, 90% of news platforms in the United States provided a comment section on their website [6]. Many celebrated the benefits of comment sections, suggesting it would usher an era of deliberative democracy [7,8] and create new public spaces where people easily and quickly voice their opinions—allowing citizens to understand what others think about issues [9].

On the other hand, others have been pessimistic (including journalists; [10]) arguing that user comments do not enrich public discourse and comment sections do not automatically promote healthy democratic exchange. User comments can spread negativity [11], misleading or false information [12], and extreme populist ideas [13]. Further, comments can include uncivil language [14] that insults others (i.e., dark participation; [15]).

Researchers also recognized these user comment sections impact others who read comment threads—swaying attitudes [9], risk perceptions [14], public opinion perceptions [16] and behaviors [17]. Importantly, many recognized user comments can hurt the reputations of journalists and media platforms—making them seem less credible and trustworthy [18–20]. Some news organizations like USA Today, Reuters and NPR have responded by dropping comment sections from their websites.

Given the disconnect between what many hoped news-related user comments could do to help society and public discourse [7,8,21], and findings suggesting news-related user comments may be detrimental, it is imperative to comprehensively assess current understandings of news related user comments (and their effects).

Over the past two decades, the number of quantitative studies focusing on news-related user comments has exploded and the large number of results now obscures central findings. Researchers have begun to present initial overviews of sub-areas of the field (e.g., on the content of user comments), but an up-to-date and systematic overview, from the content to the effects of user comments, is lacking.

Researchers have taken first steps in systematically examining findings related to user comments. Naab and Sehl [22] conducted a systematic review of content analyses regarding user comments published in nine academic journals between 2004 and 2012. They explored processes such as the theoretical frameworks employed by scholars and the modality examined (e.g., text vs. moving image). Reimer et al. [23] conducted another systematic review of content analyses of user comments, primarily focused on methodology. They found an overabundance of analyses from Anglo-American newspapers and a focus on incivility.

While these systematic reviews provide valuable insights into user comments research, and others have added to the literature through non-systematic reviews of user comments (e.g., [24,25]), we suggest it is essential to systematically re-assess the current state of knowledge in the literature. Given the fast paced and changing media market [26], it is essential to re-examine current understandings of user comments frequently. However, previous systematic reviews included papers published by 2012 in nine pre-selected academic journals [22] and by 2016 [23]—meaning any recent insights have yet to be considered within a systematic review. Further, the systematic reviews focused on current understandings of content analyses (i.e., what comments look like) and less so on many other questions related to comments. For example, what commenting is related to, and the effects of commenting.

In the current research we are the first to conduct a broad systematic review—quantitatively and qualitatively oriented—where we consider the contents of user comments, motives that predict commenting, demographic factors like gender, news use, and levels of political participation that correlate with user comments, and effects of news-related user comments. See **TABLE 1**. Additionally, we report our systematic review in-line with PRISMA guidelines for writing reviews [27].

While past reviews provide meaningful insights, questions regarding news-related user comments remain. In the current research, we close these gaps and answer three research questions. RQ1 is quantitatively oriented and asks: How can the current state of research on news-related user comments be characterized in terms of (a) the development of the research over time, (b) the demographics of samples, (c) and the methods used? RQ2 is qualitatively oriented and asks: What do we know about news-related user comments regarding (a) the content of comments (e.g., are user comments frequently uncivil?) (b) what factors correlate with commenting (e.g., is commenting associated with news use?) and (c) the effect of comments (e.g., can user comments shape others' attitudes?)? The third research question (RQ3) is both quantitatively and qualitatively oriented and asks: How are news-related user comments examined in the literature?

## Methods

For this systematic review, we conducted analyses using a 2-stage approach. In Stage 1, we determined which papers fit the criteria for being included in our review using a systematic coding approach. In Stage 2, we systematically coded papers (a quantitative approach), and extracted key findings from each paper (a qualitative approach). Further details about each step are found below.

### Stage 1: Determining Inclusion Criteria

To answer our research questions, we conducted a systematic literature search using Web of Science (aligned with previous systematic reviews; see [28–31]) to identify potentially relevant articles. Our search terms focused on user-generated comments and news media. Example search terms include: "user comment," "reader comment," "online comment," and "news," "news article," "press coverage." We searched for articles that referenced both user comments and news—checking article titles, abstracts, and the keywords of articles. Through this search process (conducted on April 4th, 2022)[1], 553 articles were identified that contained a combination of keywords from both categories.

Our Web of Science search was complemented by also considering articles from other available reviews about news-related user comments [24,23]. In this step, we included articles that were accessible through Web of Science that were not already included in our search query (N=57).[2] Reasons why these papers were not included related to divergent terminology used by authors (e.g., using the term "post" rather than "comment" in the abstract; [32]). This resulted in a total of 610 papers that were further examined regarding whether they should be included in this review.

**TABLE 1** Comparison of previous systematic reviews of user comments as compared to current systematic review.

| | Predictors of user comments | Content of user comments | Effects of user comments | Correlations with user comments | Year of publication of reviewed papers |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| Naab and Sehl [22] | | ✗ | | | 2004–2012 |
| Reimer et al. [23] | | ✗ | | | By December 2016 |
| Current review | ✗ | ✗ | ✗ | ✗ | By April 2022 |

In a next step, two trained research assistants independently assessed a total of 610 papers (based on instructions provided in a codebook; see Appendix A) to determine which papers would be included in the systematic review. Articles were included in the sample when: (a) the article was in English, (b) the article was quantitative in nature and published in an academic journal, and (c) the article focused on the content of comments, constructs that correlated with user comments or the effects of news-related user comments. To ensure reliability, approximately 10% of the identified research papers were assessed by both research assistants (there was 89.29% agreement between research assistants). Based on our exclusion criteria we identified 258 articles that should be coded in this systematic review (See **FIGURE 1**).

### Stage 2: Coding Included Papers

Two research assistants coded the included papers (N=258) on a variety of dimensions following a systematic codebook (see Appendix B). Both research assistants were extensively trained[3] and read through each paper—coding a variety of quantitative and qualitative categories for each relevant study within a paper. Each research assistant was responsible for independently coding half of all papers (i.e., approximately 130 papers each). Key quantitative categories include year of publication, study method, country of sample, the news source, type of news content, whether the study was focused on news or social media, if on social media—which social media site was used, and whether the paper explicitly studied incivility.[4] Research assistants also reported the topics being considered within the study (e.g., what topic the news content discussed). A more qualitative category was related to key findings from each study.

To ensure reliability, both coders and the 1st author coded the same 24 papers. There was high reliability in codes between the 1st author and RA 1 (κ=0.93),[5] the 1st author and RA 2 (κ=0.97), and between RA 1 and RA 2 (κ=0.89). Reliability analysis indicated interrater reliability was moderately to strongly reliable. More information about reliability can be found in Appendix C. All articles included in this review, their codes, and codebooks can be found here: https://osf.io/swx76/?view_only=30aa778596aa4c469634fe84a3de63bb. We encourage other scholars to use these materials in future research on user comments.

During the coding process, we recognized some papers (N=27) that were originally included in this systematic review did not actually qualify (e.g., because the article was more qualitatively focused than originally thought or because the comments were not news-related). This was determined after a more careful and complete read through during the coding process—231 papers (248 studies) were included in analyses.

## Results

We present both quantitative and qualitative results. Due to space limitations, we cannot report every finding from every paper, but provide a broad scope for understanding the key areas of agreement (and disagreement) between scholars, key methods and perspectives, and overarching patterns (and gaps) in current understandings of news-related user comments.

### Quantitative Analyses

#### Year of Publication

We answer RQ1a (i.e., assessing development of research over time), by assessing when articles on news-related user comments were published, results revealed growing interest in this research. The earliest article was published in 2008—since then there has been exponential growth in publications. See **FIGURE 2**.

#### Sample Characteristics

To assess RQ1b (i.e., the demographics of samples in user comment research), we next focused on where samples came from. We found an overabundance of research conducted in Western societies—especially in the United States (N=100) and Germany (N=46), but also found numerous studies in South Korea (N=18). While there was a lot of research conducted within Western societies—there was still great diversity in samples (e.g., in India, Israel, China, Russia, and Chile)—though there were few samples from the Global South. See **FIGURE 3**.

#### Methodology

Answering RQ1c (i.e., regarding methodology), we found that studies exploring news-related user comments frequently used content analyses (131 studies, 52.82%), followed by experiments (109 studies, 43.95%), and then surveys (7 studies, 2.82%).

**FIGURE 1** Flow chart of paper identification, inclusion determination, coding criteria, reliability analysis and the methodology utilized in papers included in systematic review.

```
Available by April 4th, 2022
Database:
• Web of Science
Keywords:
"user comment", "reader comment*",
"online comment", "user-generated
comment", "comment section", "below-
the-line comment"
AND
"news", "news article*", "press article",
"news item", "media coverage", "media
story", "media stories", "news stories",
"press coverage", "news coverage",
"newspaper", "media text"
↓
n = 553 articles
+ 52 articles from Reimer et al. [23]
+ 5 articles from Ksiazek & Springer [24]
↓
n = 610 articles
↓
Reliability Analysis For Inclusion
Criteria (56 papers)
% Code Agreement
RA1 and RA2: 89.29%
↓
Inclusion Criteria
- Article in English
- Article presents data in a quantitative way
  (no theory paper, qualitative data,
  editorial or conference paper)
- Article about either 1) the content of user
  comments under news stories or 2) the
  effect of user comments under news
  stories
↓
n = 258 articles
↓
Reliability Analysis For Coding
Included Papers (24 papers)
% Code Agreement
RA 1 and 1st author: κ=.93
RA 2 and 1st author: κ=.97
RA 1 and RA 2: κ=.89
↓
Coding Criteria
For each included study:
- Method
- Sample size and type
- Country
- News Source
- Type of News Content
- Political Topic
- Dependent Variable
- Key Finding
↓
27 removed post-coding for not meeting
inclusion criteria (after careful read
through during coding process)
↓
n = 231 papers (248 studies)

Methodological Overview of Included Studies (N=248)
• Content of Comments (e.g., Content Analyses): n = 131 studies
• What Comments Relate to (e.g., Surveys): n = 7 studies
• Effects of Comments (e.g., Experiments): n = 109 studies
• Other (multi-method approaches): n = 1 study
```

#### News Source

To answer RQ3 (i.e., how news-related user comments are examined in the literature), we explored what kinds of news sources (and their comments) were examined. Most studies (221 studies, 89.52%) solely considered news articles (and their accompanying user comments). Of which, only 49 (22.17%) assessed effects in non-Western samples. Thirteen studies (5.24%) considered news videos (e.g., TV content) and their accompanying comments, though only 2 of these studies came from non-Western samples (15.38%). Some studies (13 studies, 5.24%) considered a variety of news sources within a given study (e.g., consider both news articles and TV news).

**FIGURE 2** Number of publications on news-related user comments per publication year. For papers published as Early Access papers on the day of retrieval (April 4th 2022), we checked when those papers were published first online and included that information in the graph above. Of these early access papers; 4 papers were published first online in 2020, 8 in 2021, and 9 in 2022. We do not depict the papers published in 2022 as we only collected papers published by April 4th 2022–thus we had incomplete data for 2022. Therefore 4 published papers (and 9 early access papers) are excluded from this figure.

| Year | Number of Publications |
|---|---|
| 2008 | 1 |
| 2009 | 3 |
| 2010 | 1 |
| 2011 | 2 |
| 2012 | 5 |
| 2013 | 1 |
| 2014 | 15 |
| 2015 | 22 |
| 2016 | 15 |
| 2017 | 16 |
| 2018 | 27 |
| 2019 | 35 |
| 2020 | 38 |
| 2021 | 37 |

#### Traditional News vs. Social Media News Content

To further answer RQ3, we coded for whether researchers considered comments under news content on a news site or social media. Results indicated 72.18% of studies (N=179) focused solely on traditional news content, 19.35% of studies (N=48) focused solely on news media content on social media (e.g., news article posted to Facebook) and 6.85% of studies (N=17) considered both social media and traditional news media content.

**FIGURE 3** Distribution of samples across countries. Red circles represent samples from that country, the larger the circle the more samples from that country. 13 studies did not provide clear information regarding the country the sample came from and 7 studies included worldwide samples (e.g., recruiting participants through the Internet). These studies were not included in the above map.

[World map with red circles indicating sample distribution; larger circles indicate more samples from that country]

#### Social Media Platforms

Of the studies considering news content on social media (N=65), most assessed news shared on Facebook (N=52, 80.00%), though only 5 of those studies that focused on Facebook used non-Western samples (11.54%)—a serious gap in the literature given Facebook's much higher prevalence in non-Western societies [33]. Six studies considered content on Twitter (9.23%) (only 1 of which was a non-Western sample), only 2 studies (3.08%) considered news-related user comments on Instagram (1 was a non-Western sample), and 10 studies explored content on YouTube (15.38%), 2 of which focused on non-Western samples. There were several studies (4 studies, 6.15%) that used less well-known social media platforms (e.g., Vkontakte; [34]). No studies explored user comments under news content on TikTok. These results (in part) answer RQ3 by explaining the contexts and places where user comments are frequently assessed.

#### Outcome Measures

We also coded whether or not studies focused on questions related to the incivility of user comments—believing this could be a key outcome variable. Results suggested a sizeable proportion of studies did research incivility (N=72, 29.03%). This outcome measure is discussed more in the qualitative section.

### Qualitative Analyses

In addition to our quantitative analyses, we also took a more qualitative approach in understanding the topics and themes of included studies to further assess RQ2 and RQ3.

#### Diversity in News and User Comment Topics

There were a variety of topics discussed in the news content (and comments) across studies—providing some partial insights in RQ3 (i.e., how user comments are examined in the literature). Topics ranged from political (elections; [35]) to apolitical topics (celebrity news; [36]; sports; [37]). We outline some key topics frequently studied below.

Many studies considered hot-button issues in the news. Examples include climate change (e.g., [38]), gun policy [39,40], and immigration (e.g., [13]). Many studies also considered social issues like LGBTQ adoption rights [41] and abortion access (e.g., [42]).

There was a heavy focus on health-related topics. Many considered vaccinations [43], mental health care [44], and disease outbreak [45]. Some news content focused on scandals [19].

Finally, many studies considered news content (and comments) about science communication and education. Examples of science communication include reports on research about differences between men and women's brains [46] and diabetes [47]. In terms of education, scholars considered laws for schools [48], lawsuits against schools [49] and appropriate conduct between educators and students [50]. Taken together, and answering RQ3, there is a great variety of contexts where user comments are analyzed.

#### Key Results from User Comments Research

To understand the overarching themes of results across studies, and to answer RQ2, we next break down results into three subsections: the content of comments (RQ2a), what factors correlate with comments (RQ2b), and the effects of comments (RQ2c).

#### The Content of User Comments

To answer RQ2a, we first qualitatively examined all content analyses—exploring key findings related to the contents of comments.

##### Incivility

Many content analyses explored incivility, examining what drives incivility and the frequency of incivility in comments. Some research suggests when there are more sources referenced within a news article and there is journalistic participation in comment sections, people leave fewer uncivil comments (e.g., [51]). Incivility was common under news stories about politics [52]. Further, there was consistent evidence that anonymity on platforms drives incivility [53].

Others explored whether incivility varies by platform. Researchers found conservative news and local news (as compared to liberal and national news) tends to include more uncivil comments [54]. Others found uncivil commenting may be more common in conservative news (vs. liberal news) [55]. These results suggest conservative media may incite greater incivility in user comments.

Another important consideration that had little attention is whether there are societal differences in commenting uncivilly. In one study, comments under Chilean news were found to be especially uncivil (and more so than comments under news from the Global North; [35]). In another analysis, uncivil comments occurred more often in majoritarian (rather than consensus-based) democracies [56].[6] These results indicate societal differences may be a key factor for understanding the incivility of comments—but more research is needed to explore these differences.

A looming question is whether incivility is increasing over time and in its pervasiveness. Again, there has been little research focused on this longitudinal perspective, though in one study in Hungary between 2017 and 2019, researchers found incivility in comments remained stable over time [52].

Some scholars suggest incivility in news-related user comments is not widespread (e.g., [57]). In one study, comments posted under news videos on YouTube showed higher levels of civility than hostility [58]. However, other research suggests incivility is common in online discussions (e.g., [59]). Others find that incivility is more common than other more deliberative forms of commenting [60]. These results suggest an ongoing debate in scholarly research regarding incivility.

##### Positive and Negative Comments

Some content analyses examined the positive and negative sentiment of comments. For example, people responded more positively to news articles when those articles discuss cures for diabetes as compared to preventative measures for diabetes [47]. These findings are in-line with other research suggesting whether people respond to news content positively or negatively is highly dependent on the topic itself (e.g., [44]). Several studies made inferences about peoples' attitudes towards specific issues depending on whether they responded positively or negatively to news content. For example, to understand how people feel about the European Union [61].

##### Additional Themes Within the Content of User Comments

While many studies focused on the incivility or sentiment in user comments, others found that commenters often discuss themes or topics that are seemingly disconnected or unrelated to the news content itself (e.g., [62]). However, other research disputes this idea [63].

In some research, scholars focused on how people feel towards specific policies or political issues by analyzing the content of their comments. For example, exploring how people felt about Driving Under the Influence (DUI) enforcement [64], migration issues [65], beliefs about organic foods [66], national safety and security [67], celebrity suicide [68], vaccine effectiveness [69], and trigger warnings [70].

Several studies explored the use of narratives and facts and data within user comments—a promising area of research as part work suggests narratives can be persuasive (e.g., [71]) and help bridge divides between people who disagree [72]. Scholars find narratives are commonplace in comment threads [73] and that many commenters discussed personal opinions rather than facts or data [63].

#### The Predictors of User Comments

We found that other scholars assessed the predictors of user comments and their contents (e.g., what causes people to comment, which factors shape certain types of commenting behavior). In these studies, authors examine the content of user comments (e.g., content analyses), but focus on what predicts this content.

##### How News Shapes Commenting

Some research explored how the type of content in news media can influence if and how people comment—considering the news content itself or differences across news platforms (e.g., [6])—key considerations for understanding commenting behavior [52,74]. Some found that news content about political and social issues are especially likely to be commented on [75], and that sentiment and polarizing language in news media influences commenting behaviors [76]. Additionally, news events that have geographic proximity to readers increases commenting behavior [77], but there is no evidence of differences in volume of comments below hard and soft news [78]. However, understanding when people are likely to comment is complex as others have found that distributions of which types of news content people comment on can differ across news media sources [79], and may be dependent on whether news reports are in-line with readers' views [80].

In terms of the potential differing effects of news platforms (or news sources) on comments, there is less research. Some suggest news outlets with larger reach are more likely to have comment sections and are more likely to have numerous comments below their content [6]. Multiple studies also explored differences in commenting across platforms—finding meaningful differences between news sites [81].

Not only can news content and platforms influence when people write comments, but they also shape opinions expressed in comments. Multiple studies found comments mirrored the views presented in news content (e.g., [82])—though others find this may not be the case (e.g., [83]), and that comment sections may push back against media portrayals (e.g., [84]).

##### Demographics and Motives of Commenters

Other studies explored who comments (and the motives for why they do it). Results indicated that while women participate less than men and tend to write more civil comments than men, women still receive similar numbers of uncivil replies as men [85]. Further, women are more likely to leave comments under news related to social issues and celebrities whereas men often leave comments under news about politics and sports [86]. There was evidence for differences in where people comment depending on age. People in their 30s and 40s are more likely to post comments than other age groups and teenagers are especially unlikely to comment [86].

Other scholars explored how political ideology may shape user comments. For example, liberals were more willing to include cross-cutting justifications and questions within their comments than conservatives [87], and moral disengagement was significantly more common in comments on right-wing (vs. left-wing) newspapers [88]. The political slant of user comments in conservative media paralleled news outlets' political leaning; yet, a similar pattern was not observed in progressive medias' comment sections [89]. Taken together, these results suggest demographic considerations are important for considering who comments under which news content.

Based on analyses of comments, scholars have also pointed to peoples' motivation for commenting as connected to their motives for information sharing, entertainment, and voicing disapproval [90]. Several scholars showed that comments can also be used as a tool to counter public opinion. For example, multiple studies found that minority groups (e.g., political movements) can make up large majorities of comments sections in leading newspapers' comments threads—making their ideas potentially powerful in countering majority opinion (e.g., [91,92]).

A few studies explored the differences between frequent and infrequent commenters. Some found that frequent commenters are more civil [93], but others found frequent commenters are less likely to be civil [94]. Others find when one's own incivility is reaffirmed by others (e.g., by up voting this content), they are more likely to continue commenting uncivilly [95].

##### Downstream Consequences in Comments Threads

Some content analyses also explored the consequences of comments in terms of how they shaped further commenting. Results indicate populist themes [13], and controversial comments [96] all drove others to comment. On the other hand, comments that sowed doubt were less popular and were not recommended as frequently as other types of comments [97].

#### Correlates of User Comments

As noted earlier, very few studies were survey based (i.e., correlational), meaning there are still many gaps in our understanding of what factors are correlated with news-related user comments (answering RQ2b). One study found that commenting was positively associated with political participation [98]. Others focused on how perceptions of user comments are related to who people believe is responsible for moderating user comment content [99]. Another study found sadistic personality traits were more associated with incivility in user comments [100].

#### The Effects of User Comments

We also qualitatively examined insights from experimental research—exploring the effect of comments to answer RQ2c.

##### Incivility

In experiments focusing on the consequences of user comments, many scholars focused on how uncivil comments influence others' attitudes and perceptions—there was clear evidence that incivility was associated with negative effects. Readers were more likely to have hostile cognitions [101], discussions in online threads were less deliberative [102], caused negative emotions and aggressive intentions [103], and increased perceptions of attitude polarization in society [104].

There was nearly consistent evidence that uncivil comments provoked negative perceptions of news content and journalists. Uncivil comments reduced perceptions of journalistic quality [105] and credibility [106,107] whereas civil comments increased credibility of news outlets [107]. However, one study suggested uncivil (vs. civil) comments did not influence participants' perceptions of the credibility of the news story [108]. Uncivil comments invoked negative attitudes towards the editorial and pushed people away from the editorial's point of view [109]. Journalists can deal with uncivil comments using content moderation—however there are consequences of this as well. While uncivil comments in moderated environments are less likely to cause perceptions of news article bias [110], some evidence suggests this is only the case when threads are moderated by machines (rather than journalists; [111])—suggesting artificial intelligence may be a helpful tool to combat the negative effects of incivility in user comments.

Uncivil comments also shaped behavior. People were more likely to engage with uncivil comment threads (e.g., [112])—and react negatively towards them (e.g., [42]). One study found conservatives (but not liberals) were more likely to engage with uncivil comments when those comments discussed politically divisive issues [113]. Others found that civil comments also increased engagement in discussions [114].

Thoughts about uncivil commenters tended to be negative. People believed commenters writing uncivil comments should be censored or moderated [115,116], and information conveyed through uncivil comments was less trustworthy [117] than other types of comments—though other research suggests people still believe these comments will be persuasive to others [115]. Further, other research suggests people see uncivil comments from in-group members as less uncivil than uncivil comments from out-group members [118]. Overall, there is a strong focus on research examining the effects of uncivil comments; future studies could shed further light on the effects of civil news-related user comments.

##### News Evaluations

Beyond the many studies that suggested uncivil comments can negatively affect attitudes towards news content and journalists [105–107], others have found that user comments shape evaluations of news media (e.g., [119]). In terms of attitudes towards the news platform, results indicated it was beneficial for journalists to respond directly to commenters, as this increased positive evaluations [120]. News coverage with positive user comments was evaluated more positively than news coverage with negative comments [121]. Further disrespectful comments led readers to view the editorial more negatively [109].

In terms of news credibility, people were more likely to question the credibility of the news source when comments suggested it was "fake news" [122], or included negative sentiment [123]. Also, mixed comments (a mix of positive and negative comments) negatively affected readers' perceived quality of a news article [19]. News articles were seen as less credible when a comment critiqued the news—but only when that comment was also "liked" by other readers [20]. Others found no effect of news credibility based on whether comments were present or not [124].

There was little research exploring how comments affect perceived news bias. In one experiment, participants who saw like-minded comments (i.e., comments that agreed with the news story) perceived the news as less biased [40]. People also viewed news content as less trustworthy when negative comments were present [125].

In terms of persuasion, comments reduced the third person effect (i.e., thinking others would be more influenced by the news article than oneself) [126]. Further, those who read opinion challenging articles with comments in-line with the article's view, perceived the article as more useful [50].

Few considered over time effects regarding how comments shape perceptions of news. In one study, results indicated user comments can reduce the persuasion of a news article in the short (but not long) term [127]. Another study found order effects and evidence for a negativity bias (i.e., interaction effect) showing that exposure to negative (vs. positive) comments after (vs. before) a news article decreased people's journalistic quality perceptions [128].

##### Congruent vs. Incongruent Comments

Research indicated readers had more positive evaluations of comments that were pro-attitudinal to their beliefs [129]. People also assessed in-group commenters more favorably than outgroup commenters—but only when in-group members also held a similar issue position to the participant [118]. People with strong opinions were more likely to comment on counter-attitudinal threads [130].

Participants perceived news-congruent user comments as more credible and better argued than comments disagreeing with news content [131]. Others found whether comments were congruent or not with a news story shaped perceptions of the issue discussed in that news article, especially when comments came from high-status commenters [132].

Many studies considering (in)congruent comments focused on how these comments shape public opinion perceptions and political polarization. For example, Lee et al. [16] showed that participants perceived both public opinion and the news tone to be more congenial to their own position when they were exposed to opinion-reinforcing (vs. opinion-challenging) news-related user comments, which (indirectly) increased opinion polarization.

Other research found those who read news related user comments not in-line with their own personal views, believed that public opinion disagreed with their own views and also held greater hostile media perceptions—but this was only true for people with higher levels of ego-involvement [48]. Contrarily, other research informed by spiral of silence theory [133] found incongruent user comments did not shape perceptions of public opinion, but rather made participants believe their opinion was in the minority of this particular news source [134].

##### Positive vs. Negative Comments

Other research focused on the sentiment of user comments and how this impacted attitudes and perceptions. News articles about scandals including comments with negative sentiment towards the scandalized individual, were associated with readers seeing the scandalized individual as more responsible [19]. However, negative sentiment towards news content itself can also have implications for how people see news. Such comments can reduce the credibility of news (e.g., [123]).

Positive and negative comments can also shape how people feel both about society (e.g., public opinion climate; [37]), and specific issues (e.g., negative comments can reduce issue importance; [123]) and shift peoples' attitudes [135]. Importantly, user comments also shape how people view others. In one study, exposure to positive comments reduced prejudice; the beneficial effects of positive comments were present even one week later—suggesting stability in this attitude change [136].

##### Platform Design, Moderation, and Anonymity

Fewer experiments explored how the design of the online commenting spaces shapes effects. Some research suggested that when readers were aware news sites moderate their comment threads (and that some comments are deleted), it can make readers less likely to agree with the news content [49]—a potential backfire effect of news platforms attempting to moderate comments. Further, others have focused on developing strategies to increase user engagement, finding that allowing users to categorize their viewpoints encourages more commenting [137]. Others studied the effect of organizations and companies responding within comment threads, finding it can increase their reputation [138], and credibility [139]—suggesting interactions within comment threads can be advantageous for organizations.

Commentor anonymity is also an important factor to consider in user comments research—though there is little research on this topic. People are more likely to share views in comment threads when they are anonymous [140]. However, other research found that men (but not women) are more likely to respond to comments when they are anonymous [141].

## Discussion

In this systematic review, we analyzed articles assessing news-related user comments. We find a growing interest in this topic, with many articles being published after the systematic reviews of Reimer et al. [23]—which analyzed papers published by 2016, and Naab and Sehl [22]—which analyzed papers published by 2012. This growth in recent research emphasizes the need for our re-assessment of the literature. Additionally, previous systematic reviews focused on content analyses of user comments—we go beyond that by also considering the correlates and effects of user comments through also examining correlational and experimental research. Based on our review, we formulate several implications for research and digital journalism practice and have 4 take away messages.

### Steep Increase in Studies, but Lack of Comparative and Longitudinal Approaches

Our analyses suggested a steep increase in research on user comments. One explanation for this increasing interest could be related to the growing use of social and digital media for news [26], and the growing pervasiveness of user comment threads in news content (e.g., [3]). We also find great diversity in the countries considered in user comment research—though more data is still needed from non-Western countries. However, few compare user-comments cross-culturally (or overtime)—making it difficult to infer whether the content, corollaries, and effects of news-related comments are universal or societally specific or have long-lasting effects. We encourage future research to take a more cross-cultural and longitudinal perspective in understanding news-related user comments.

### Stronger Focus on Social Media and Video-Based Content

Research was narrow in terms of the type of news content (and comments) being assessed. Most studies considered text-based news content (e.g., online news articles), rather than video-based content—content frequently used on both online news platforms and social media (see [26]). In line with this, more than 70% of the studies examined traditional digital news. In contrast, less than 20% of studies examined news-related user comments on social media. Further emphasizing this point is that only two studies assessed news-related user comments on Instagram [34,74] and none considered TikTok—both visual-based platforms that many increasingly use to access news content [26]. Future research should expand analyses to consider video-based news content (see [18]) and a more diverse set of social media platforms to gain a clearer understanding of the content (and effects) of user comments when presented in social media contexts.

### Regarding Platform Design, Content Moderation and Artificial Intelligence

Further research needs to assess the influence of platform design in comment threads, particularly regarding the role of anonymity. While some suggest anonymity in comment sections negatively influences comments (e.g., making them more uncivil; [53]; see also the online disinhibition effect, [142]), other findings revealed that anonymity increased the likelihood that people share their views in a comments thread [140]. Many questions remain, for example, understanding the psychological mechanisms for why anonymity drives people to engage more uncivilly.

One way journalists can deal with these uncivil comments is via content moderation. However, while some research reveals that uncivil comments in moderated environments are less likely to cause perceptions of news article bias [110], users may feel confused or even frustrated when journalists use content moderation systems that remove content without informing people about particular reasons for content removal [143]; sometimes interactive or motivational moderation techniques may be more beneficial [144].

Further, content moderation of news-related user comments by journalists can drive negative perceptions of news media platforms, for example negatively influencing the credibility of a news story [111]. In this context, a promising new line of research shows that artificial intelligence (AI) may be one way for journalistic organizations to deal with uncivil user comments, while simultaneously protecting news credibility. Wang [111] showed that news bias was reduced when uncivil comments were moderated by AI (vs. a human journalist). Future research should consider new possibilities offered by AI and examine these in the context of user comments. For example, understanding the psychological mechanisms for why artificial intelligence can reduce perceived news bias better than journalists.

### Search for Measures to Reduce Incivility and Negative Impact on Digital Journalism

While many explore incivility in user comments (in terms of both content and effects), there is one glaring gap in the literature—how we can motivate people to be less uncivil in their comments. The literature indicates uncivil comments have many negative consequences, for example, driving negative emotions and aggressive intentions [103], fostering more negative attitudes towards journalism [105–107,109] (but also see [108]), and promotion of (political) polarization [104]. Further, research suggests uncivil comments tend to invoke further uncivil comments by others (see [112])—potentially reducing the quality of online conversations. Based on these findings, we suggest future research should find new ways to reduce peoples' willingness to write (or respond to) uncivil news-related comments. Finding new intervention strategies to reduce both incivility and the corresponding negative (unwanted) effects incivility has on journalism is a promising avenue for future research.

## Limitations

While the review provides unique insights into current understandings of news-related user comments, it also has limitations. We focused only on peer-reviewed quantitative articles—meaning we do not consider qualitative papers nor conference or theory papers in these analyses. Focusing on quantitative papers allowed for a systematic coding of each article—however, of course, this leads to a limitation of not considering the full breadth of scholarly research on news-related user comments. Additionally, all potentially relevant papers may not have been included in our review due to divergent terminology used across papers (e.g., "posts" rather than "comments")—a limitation we attempted to address (in part) by also collecting potentially relevant papers from other reviews [23,24]. Finally, we view the current review as a first step in deeply understanding research on user comments. With this, we took a qualitative approach to understanding current findings. This means we do not systematically assess individual results but rather take a broad approach—examining overarching patterns and trends. We encourage scholars to further assess user comments through our open access list of included papers. These limitations should be kept in mind when interpreting results.

## Conclusion

With the introduction of comment sections under news content, came normative ideas that such sections could be beneficial for public discourse and democracy (e.g., [8]; see [7,21]). However, current scholarly understandings of user comments suggest there may be many ill-effects (e.g., sowing distrust of journalism and snowballing incivility between commenters). We call on scholars to further consider (1) comparative and longitudinal approaches, (2) social media and video-based content, (3) platform design, content moderation, and artificial intelligence, and (4) search for measures to reduce incivility and negative impacts on digital journalism. Addressing these gaps will bring us one step closer to more fully understanding news-related user comments.

## References

1. Bruns A. Gatewatching: Collaborative online news production. Berlin: Peter Lang; 2005.

2. Hermida A, Thurman N. A clash of cultures: The integration of user-generated content within professional journalistic frameworks at British newspaper websites. Journal Pract. 2008;2(3):343–356.

3. Stroud NJ, Van Duyn E, Peacock C. News commenters and news comment readers. Engaging News Project; 2016.

4. Springer N, Engelmann I, Pfaffinger C. User comments: Motives and inhibitors to write and read. Inf Commun Soc. 2015;18(7):798–815.

5. Santana AD. Online readers' comments represent new opinion pipeline. Newsp Res J. 2011;32(3):66–81.

6. Stroud NJ, Scacco JM, Curry AL. The presence and use of interactive features on news websites. Digit Journal. 2016;4(3):339–358.

7. Habermas J. Strukturwandel der Öffentlichkeit. Neuwied: Suhrkamp; 1962.

8. Engelke KM. Enriching the conversation: Audience perspectives on the deliberative nature and potential of user comments for news media. Digit Journal. 2020;8(4):447–466.

9. Lee E-J, Jang YJ. What do others' reactions to news on internet portal sites tell us? Effects of presentation format and readers' need for cognition on reality perception. Commun Res. 2010;37(6):825–846.

10. Bergström A, Wadbring I. Beneficial yet crappy: Journalists and audiences on obstacles and opportunities in reader comments. Eur J Commun. 2015;30(2):137–151.

11. Winter S, Brückner C, Krämer NC. They came, they liked, they commented: Social influence on Facebook news channels. Cyberpsychol Behav Soc Netw. 2015;18(8):431–436.

12. Anspach NM, Carlson TN. What to believe? Social media commentary and belief in misinformation. Polit Behav. 2020;42:697–718.

13. Blassnig S, Engesser S, Ernst N, Esser F. Hitting a nerve: Populist news articles lead to more frequent and more populist reader comments. Polit Commun. 2019;36(4):629–651.

14. Anderson AA, Brossard D, Scheufele DA, Xenos MA, Ladwig P. The "nasty effect:" Online incivility and risk perceptions of emerging technologies. J Comput-Mediat Commun. 2014;19(3):373–387.

15. Frischlich L, Boberg S, Quandt T. Comment sections as targets of dark participation? Journalists' evaluation and moderation of deviant user comments. Journal Stud. 2019;20(14):2014–2033.

16. Lee E-J, Jang YJ, Chung M. When and how user comments affect news readers' personal opinion: Perceived public opinion and perceived news position as mediators. Digit Journal. 2021;9(1):42–63.

17. Hsueh M, Yogeeswaran K, Malinen S. "Leave your comment below": Can biased online comments influence our own prejudicial attitudes and behaviors? Hum Commun Res. 2015;41(4):557–576.

18. Walther JB, DeAndrea D, Kim J, Anthony JC. The influence of online comments on perceptions of antimarijuana public service announcements on YouTube. Hum Commun Res. 2010;36(4):469–492.

19. von Sikorski C, Hänelt M. Scandal 2.0: How valanced reader comments affect recipients' perception of scandalized individuals and the journalistic quality of online news. Journal Mass Commun Q. 2016;93(3):551–571.

20. Naab TK, Heinbach D, Ziegele M, Grasberger M-T. Comments and credibility: How critical user comments decrease perceived news article credibility. Journal Stud. 2020;21(6):783–801.

21. Habermas J. Ein neuer Strukturwandel der Öffentlichkeit und die deliberative Politik. Berlin: Suhrkamp; 2022.

22. Naab TK, Sehl A. Studies of user-generated content: A systematic review. Journalism. 2017;18(10):1256–1273.

23. Reimer J, Häring M, Loosen W, Maalej W, Merten L. Content analyses of user comments in journalism: A systematic literature review spanning communication studies and computer science. Digit Journal. 2023;11(8):1328–1352.

24. Ksiazek TB, Springer N. User comments in digital journalism: Current research and future directions. In: Eldridge II S, Franklin B, editors. The Routledge handbook of developments in digital journalism studies. London: Routledge; 2018. p. 475–486.

25. Naab TK, Küchler C. Content analysis in the research field of online user comments. In: Oehmer-Pedrazzi F, Kessler SH, Humprecht E, Sommer K, Castro L, editors. Standardisierte Inhaltsanalyse in der Kommunikationswissenschaft – Standardized content analysis in communication research: Ein Handbuch – A handbook. Wiesbaden: Springer VS; 2023. p. 441–450.

26. Newman N, Fletcher R, Eddy K, Robertson CT, Nielsen RK. Reuters Institute digital news report 2023. Reuters Institute; 2023.

27. Page MJ, McKenzie JE, Bossuyt PM, Boutron I, Hoffmann TC, Mulrow CD, et al. The PRISMA 2020 statement: An updated guideline for reporting systematic reviews. BMJ. 2021;372:n71.

28. Ahmed S, Matthes J. Media representation of Muslims and Islam from 2000 to 2015: A meta-analysis. Int Commun Gaz. 2017;79(3):219–244.

29. von Sikorski C. The aftermath of political scandals: A meta-analysis. Int J Commun. 2018;12:3109–3133.

30. Tsfati Y, Boomgaarden HG, Strömbäck J, Vliegenhart R, Damstra A, Lindgren E. Causes and consequences of mainstream media dissemination of fake news: Literature review and synthesis. Ann Int Commun Assoc. 2020;44(2):157–173.

31. Kubin E, von Sikorski C. The role of (social) media in political polarization: A systematic review. Ann Int Commun Assoc. 2021;45(3):188–206.

32. Colley A, Maltby J. Impact of the internet on our lives: Male and female personal perspectives. Comput Hum Behav. 2008;24(5):2005–2013.

33. Statista. Leading countries based on Facebook audience size as of April 2024. Statista; 2024.

34. Toepfl F, Litvinenko A. Critically commenting publics as authoritarian input institutions: How citizens comment beneath their news in Azerbaijan, Russia, and Turkmenistan. Journal Stud. 2021;22(4):475–495.

35. Saldana M, Rosenberg A. I don't want you to be my president! Incivility and media bias during the presidential election in Chile. Soc Media Soc. 2020;6(4).

36. Van den Bulck H, Claessens N. Of local and global fame: A comparative analysis of news items and audience reactions on celebrity news websites People, Heat, and HLN. Journalism. 2014;15(2):218–236.

37. Waddell TF. The authentic (and angry) audience: How comment authenticity and sentiment impact news evaluation. Digit Journal. 2020;8(2):249–266.

38. Walter S, Brüggemann M, Engesser S. Echo chambers of denial: Explaining user comments on climate change. Environ Commun. 2018;12(2):204–217.

39. Stroud NJ, Scacco JM, Muddiman A, Curry AL. Changing deliberative norms on news organizations' Facebook sites. J Comput-Mediat Commun. 2015;20(2):188–203.

40. Gearhart S, Moe A, Zhang B. Hostile media bias on social media: Testing the effect of user comments on perceptions of news bias and credibility. Hum Behav Emerg Technol. 2020;2(2):140–148.

41. Wang S. The influence of anonymity and incivility on perceptions of user comments on news websites. Mass Commun Soc. 2020;23(6):912–936.

42. Chen GM, Ng YMM. Nasty online comments anger you more than me, but nice ones make me as happy as you. Comput Hum Behav. 2017;71:181–188.

43. Masullo GM, Lu S, Fadnis D. Does online incivility cancel out the spiral of silence? A moderated mediation model of willingness to speak out. New Media Soc. 2021;23(11):3391–3414.

44. Cabrera LY, Bittlinger M, Lou H, Müller S, Illes J. Reader comments to media reports on psychiatric neurosurgery: Past history casts shadows on the future. Acta Neurochir. 2018;160:2501–2507.

45. Rodin P, Ghersetti M, Odén T. Disentangling rhetorical subarenas of public health crisis communication: A study of the 2014–2015 Ebola outbreak in the news media and social media in Sweden. J Contingencies Crisis Manag. 2019;27(3):237–246.

46. O'Connor C, Joffe H. Gender on the brain: A case study of science communication in the new media environment. PLoS ONE. 2014;9(10):e110830.

47. Vehof H, Heerdink E, Sanders J, Das E. Associations between characteristics of web-based diabetes news and readers' sentiments: Observational study in the Netherlands. J Med Internet Res. 2019;21(12):e14554.

48. Lee E-J. That's not the way it is: How user-generated comments on the news affect perceived media bias. J Comput-Mediat Commun. 2012;18(1):32–45.

49. Sherrick B, Hoewe J. The effect of explicit online comment moderation on three spiral of silence outcomes. New Media Soc. 2018;20(2):453–474.

50. Jahng MR. From reading comments to seeking news: Exposure to disagreements from online comments and the need for opinion-challenging news. J Inf Technol Polit. 2018;15(2):142–154.

51. Ksiazek TB. Commenting on the news: Explaining the degree and quality of user comments on news websites. Journal Stud. 2018;19(5):650–673.

52. Szabo G, Kmetty Z, Molnar EK. Politics and incivility in the online comments: What is beyond the norm-violation approach? Int J Commun. 2021;15:1659–1684.

53. Ksiazek TB. Civil interactivity: How news organizations' commenting policies explain civility and hostility in user comments. J Broadcast Electron Media. 2015;59(4):556–573.

54. Su LYF, Xenos MA, Rose KM, Wirz C, Scheufele DA, Brossard D. Uncivil and personal? Comparing patterns of incivility in comments on the Facebook pages of news outlets. New Media Soc. 2018;20(10):3678–3699.

55. Chen GM, Riedl MJ, Shermak JL, Brown J, Tenenboim O. Breakdown of democratic norms? Understanding the 2016 US presidential election through online comments. Soc Media Soc. 2019;5(4).

56. Jakob J, Dobbrick T, Freudenthaler R, Haffner P, Wessler H. Is constructive engagement online a lost cause? Toxic outrage in online user comments across democratic political systems and discussion arenas. Commun Res. 2023;50(4):508–531.

57. Aji AP, Sapto A. Incivility and disrespectfulness in online political discussion. Masyarakat Kebudayaan Polit. 2020;33(3):278–285.

58. Ksiazek TB, Peer L, Zivic A. Discussing the news: Civility and hostility in user comments. Digit Journal. 2015;3(6):850–870.

59. San Pascual MRS. The climate of incivility in Philippine Daily Inquirer's social media environment. Plaridel. 2020;17(1):177–207.

60. Chen GM, Fadnis D, Whipple K. Can we talk about race? Exploring online comments about race-related shootings. Howard J Commun. 2020;31(1):35–49.

61. Galpin C, Trenz HJ. Participatory populism: Online discussion forums on mainstream news sites during the 2014 European Parliament election. Journal Pract. 2019;13(7):781–798.

62. Jaques C, Islar M, Lord G. Post-truth: Hegemony on social media and implications for sustainability communication. Sustainability. 2019;11(7):2120.

63. Lee NY, McElroy K. Online comments: The nature of comments on health journalism. Comput Hum Behav. 2019;92:282–287.

64. Connor SM, Wesolowski K. Posts to online news message boards and public discourse surrounding DUI enforcement. Traffic Inj Prev. 2009;10(6):546–551.

65. Ademmer E, Leupold A, Stöhr T. Much ado about nothing? The (non)politicisation of the European Union in social media debates on migration. Eur Union Polit. 2019;20(3):305–327.

66. Danner H, Thøgersen J. Does online chatter matter for consumer behaviour? A priming experiment on organic food. Int J Consum Stud. 2022;46(3):850–869.

67. Bogain A. Understanding public constructions of counter-terrorism: An analysis of online comments during the state of emergency in France (2015-2017). Crit Stud Terror. 2020;13(4):591–615.

68. Rosen G, Kreiner H, Levi-Belz Y. Public response to suicide news reports as reflected in computerized text analysis of online reader comments. Arch Suicide Res. 2020;24(2):243–259.

69. Lei Y, Pereira JA, Quach S, Bettinger JA, Kwong JC, Corace K, et al. Examining perceptions about mandatory influenza vaccination of healthcare workers through online comments on news stories. PLoS ONE. 2015;10(6):e0129993.

70. George E, Hovey A. Deciphering the trigger warning debate: A qualitative analysis of online comments. Teach High Educ. 2020;25(7):825–841.

71. Oschatz C, Marker C. Long-term persuasive effects in narrative communication research: A meta-analysis. J Commun. 2020;70(4):473–496.

72. Kubin E, Gray K, von Sikorski C. Reducing political dehumanization by pairing facts with personal experiences. Polit Psychol. 2023;44(5):1119–1140.

73. Cabrera LY, Brandt M, McKenzie R, Bluhm R. Online comments about psychiatric neurosurgery and psychopharmacological interventions: Public perceptions and concerns. Soc Sci Med. 2019;220:184–192.

74. Aldous KK, An J, Jansen BJ. What really matters? Characterising and predicting user engagement of news postings using multiple platforms, sentiments and topics. Behav Inf Technol. 2023;42(5):545–568.

75. Tenenboim O, Cohen AA. What prompts users to click and comment: A longitudinal study of online news. Journalism. 2015;16(2):198–217.

76. Arapakis I, Lalmas M, Cambazoglu BB, Marcos MC, Jose JM. User engagement in online news: Under the scope of sentiment, interest, affect, and gaze. J Assoc Inf Sci Technol. 2014;65(10):1988–2005.

77. Maier SR. Compassion fatigue and the elusive quest for journalistic impact: A content and reader-metrics analysis assessing audience response. Journal Mass Commun Q. 2015;92(3):700–722.

78. Ksiazek TB, Peer L, Lessard K. User engagement with online news: Conceptualizing interactivity and exploring the relationship between online news videos and user comments. New Media Soc. 2016;18(3):502–520.

79. Ürper D, Çevikel T. Editorial policies, journalistic output and reader comments: A comparison of mainstream online newspapers in Turkey. Journal Stud. 2016;17(2):159–176.

80. Kim S, Rim H, Sung KH. Online engagement of active communicative behaviors and news consumption on internet portal sites. Journalism. 2021;22(12):3048–3065.

81. Esau K, Friess D, Eilders C. Design matters! An empirical analysis of online deliberation on different news platforms. Policy Internet. 2017;9(3):321–342.

82. Lien AN. A battle for truth: Islam-related counterpublic discourse on Scandinavian news media Facebook pages. New Media Soc. 2022;26(2):839–858.

83. Holton A, Lee N, Coleman R. Commenting on health: A framing analysis of user comments in response to health articles online. J Health Commun. 2014;19(7):825–837.

84. Taylor CA, Al-Hiyari R, Lee SJ, Priebe A, Guerrero LW, Bales A. Beliefs and ideologies linked with approval of corporal punishment: A content analysis of online comments. Health Educ Res. 2016;31(4):563–575.

85. Küchler C, Stoll A, Ziegele M, Naab TK. Gender-related differences in online comment sections: Findings from a large-scale content analysis of commenting behavior. Soc Sci Comput Rev. 2023;41(2):728–747.

86. Lee SY, Ryu MH. Exploring characteristics of online news comments and commenters with machine learning approaches. Telemat Inform. 2019;43:101249.

87. Freelon D. Discourse architecture, ideology, and democratic norms in online political discussion. New Media Soc. 2015;17(5):772–791.

88. Woods R, Coen S, Fernández A. Moral (dis)engagement with anthropogenic climate change in online comments on newspaper articles. J Community Appl Soc Psychol. 2018;28(4):244–257.

89. Han J, Lee Y, Lee J, Cha M. News comment sections and online echo chambers: The ideological alignment between partisan news stories and their user comments. Journalism. 2023;24(8):1836–1856.

90. Otieno AW, Roark J, Khan ML, Pant S, Grijalva MJ, Titsworth S. The kiss of death – Unearthing conversations surrounding Chagas disease on YouTube. Cogent Soc Sci. 2021;7(1):1858561.

91. De Kraker J, Kuijs S, Cörvers R, Offermans A. Internet public opinion on climate change: A world views analysis of online reader comments. Int J Clim Change Strateg Manag. 2014;6(1):19–33.

92. Toepfl F, Piwoni E. Public spheres in interaction: Comment sections of news websites as counterpublic spaces. J Commun. 2015;65(3):465–488.

93. Coe K, Kenski K, Rains SA. Online and uncivil? Patterns and determinants of incivility in newspaper website comments. J Commun. 2014;64(4):658–679.

94. Blom R, Carpenter S, Bowe BJ, Lange R. Frequent contributors within U.S. newspaper comment forums: An examination of their civility and information value. Am Behav Sci. 2014;58(10):1314–1328.

95. Shmargad Y, Coe K, Kenski K, Rains SA. Social norms and the dynamics of online incivility. Soc Sci Comput Rev. 2022;40(3):717–735.

96. Ziegele M, Breiner T, Quiring O. What creates interactivity in online news discussions? An exploratory analysis of discussion factors in user comments on news items. J Commun. 2014;64(6):1111–1138.

97. Evans AM, Stavrova O, Rosenbusch H, Brandt MJ. Expressions of doubt in online news discussions. Soc Sci Comput Rev. 2023;41(1):163–180.

98. Brundidge J, Garrett RK, Rojas H, Gil De Zúñiga H. Political participation and ideological news online: "Differential gains" and "differential losses" in a presidential election cycle. Mass Commun Soc. 2014;17(4):464–486.

99. Riedl MJ, Naab TK, Masullo GM, Jost P, Ziegele M. Who is responsible for interventions against problematic comments? Comparing user attitudes in Germany and the United States. Policy Internet. 2021;13(3):433–451.

100. Beckert J, Ziegele M. The effects of personality traits and situational factors on the deliberativeness and civility of user comments on news websites. Int J Commun. 2020;14:3924–3945.

101. Rösner L, Winter S, Krämer NC. Dangerous minds? Effects of uncivil online comments on aggressive cognitions, emotions, and behavior. Comput Hum Behav. 2016;58:461–470.

102. Lück J, Nardi C. Incivility in user comments on online news articles: Investigating the role of opinion dissonance for the effects of incivility on attitudes, emotions and the willingness to participate. SCM Stud Commun Media. 2019;8(3):311–337.

103. Chen G, Lu S. Online political discourse: Exploring differences in effects of civil and uncivil disagreement in news website comments. J Broadcast Electron Media. 2017;61(1):108–125.

104. Hwang H, Kim Y, Huh CU. Seeing is believing: Effects of uncivil online debate on political polarization and expectations of deliberation. J Broadcast Electron Media. 2014;58(4):621–633.

105. Weber P, Prochazka F, Schweiger W. Why user comments affect the perceived quality of journalistic content: The role of judgment processes. J Media Psychol. 2019;31(1):24–34.

106. Searles K, Spencer S, Duru A. Don't read the comments: The effects of abusive comments on perceptions of women authors' credibility. Inf Commun Soc. 2020;23(7):947–962.

107. Masullo GM, Tenenboim O, Lu S. "Toxic atmosphere effect": Uncivil online comments cue negative audience perceptions of news outlet credibility. Journalism. 2023;24(1):101–119.

108. Kim JW, Chen MG. Exploring the influence of comment tone and content in response to misinformation in social media news. Journal Pract. 2021;15(4):456–470.

109. Liu J, McLeod DM. Counter-framing effects of user comments. Int J Commun. 2019;13:2484–2503.

110. Yeo SK, Su LYF, Scheufele DA, Brossard D, Xenos MA, Corley EA. The effect of comment moderation on perceived bias in science news. Inf Commun Soc. 2019;22(1):129–146.

111. Wang S. Moderating uncivil user comments by humans or machines? The effects of moderation agent on perceptions of bias and credibility in news content. Digit Journal. 2021;9(1):64–83.

112. Kim JW, Park S. How perceptions of incivility and social endorsement in online comments (dis)encourage engagements. Behav Inf Technol. 2019;38(3):217–229.

113. Su LYF, Scheufele DA, Brossard D, Xenos MA. Political and personality predispositions and topical contexts matter: Effects of uncivil comments on science news engagement intentions. New Media Soc. 2021;23(4):894–919.

114. Molina RG, Jennings FJ. The role of civility and metacommunication in Facebook discussions. Commun Stud. 2018;69(1):42–66.

115. Wang S, Kim KJ. Restrictive and corrective responses to uncivil user comments on news websites: The influence of presumed influence. J Broadcast Electron Media. 2020;64(2):173–192.

116. Naab TK, Naab T, Brandmeier J. Uncivil user comments increase users' intention to engage in corrective actions and their support for authoritative restrictive actions. Journal Mass Commun Q. 2021;98(2):566–588.

117. Graf J, Erba J, Harn R-W. The role of civility and anonymity on perceptions of online comments. Mass Commun Soc. 2017;20(4):526–549.

118. Kim JW. Online incivility in comment boards: Partisanship matters – but what I think matters more. Comput Hum Behav. 2018;85:405–412.

119. Clementson DE. How web comments affect perceptions of political interviews and journalistic control. Polit Psychol. 2019;40(4):815–836.

120. Masullo GM, Riedl MJ, Huang QE. Engagement moderation: What journalists should say to improve online discussions. Journal Pract. 2022;16(4):738–754.

121. Dohle M. Recipients' assessment of journalistic quality: Do online user comments or the actual journalistic quality matter? Digit Journal. 2018;6(5):563–582.

122. Jahng MR, Stoycheff E, Rochadiat A. They said it's fake: Effects of discounting cues in online comments on information quality judgments and information authentication. Mass Commun Soc. 2021;24(4):527–552.

123. Waddell TF. What does the crowd think? How online comments and popularity metrics affect news credibility and issue importance. New Media Soc. 2018;20(8):3068–3083.

124. Marchionni D. Online story commenting: An experimental test of conversational journalism and trust. Journal Pract. 2015;9(2):230–249.

125. Awobamise AO, Jarrar Y. The use of user-generated comments and their effects on the perception of news: An experimental study. Catalan J Commun Cult Stud. 2021;13(1):83–100.

126. Chung M, Munno GJ, Moritz B. Triggering participation: Exploring the effects of third-person and hostile media perceptions on online participation. Comput Hum Behav. 2015;53:452–461.

127. Heinbach D, Ziegele M, Quiring O. Sleeper effect from below: Long-term effects of source credibility and user comments on the persuasiveness of news articles. New Media Soc. 2018;20(12):4765–4786.

128. Kümpel AS, Unkel J. (Why) does comment presentation order matter for the effects of user comments? Assessing the role of the availability heuristic and the bandwagon heuristic. Commun Res Rep. 2021;38(4):217–228.

129. Petit J, Li C, Ali K. Fewer people, more flames: How pre-existing beliefs and volume of negative comments impact online news readers' verbal aggression. Telemat Inform. 2021;56:101471.

130. Duncan M, Pelled A, Wise D, Ghosh S, Shan Y, Zheng M, et al. Staying silent and speaking out in online comment sections: The influence of spiral of silence and corrective action in reaction to news. Comput Hum Behav. 2020;102:192–205.

131. Kunst M. Assessments of user comments with "alternative views" as a function of media trust. J Media Psychol. 2021;33(3):113–124.

132. von Sikorski C. The effects of reader comments on the perception of personalized scandals: Exploring the roles of comment valence and commenters' social status. Int J Commun. 2016;10:4480–4501.

133. Matthes J, Knoll J, von Sikorski C. The "spiral of silence" revisited: A meta-analysis on the relationship between perceptions of opinion support and political opinion expression. Commun Res. 2018;45(1):3–33.

134. Yun GW, Park SY, Lee S. Inside the spiral: Hostile media, minority perception, and willingness to speak out on a weblog. Comput Hum Behav. 2016;62:236–243.

135. Winter S. Impression-motivated news consumption: Are user comments in social media more influential than on news sites? J Media Psychol. 2019;31(4):203–213.

136. Stylianou S, Sofokleous R. An online experiment on the influence of online user comments on attitudes toward a minority group. Comun Soc. 2019;32(4):125–142.

137. Peacock C, Scacco JM, Jomini Stroud N. The deliberative influence of comment section structure. Journalism. 2019;20(6):752–771.

138. Spence PR, Lachlan KA, Lin X, Westerman D, Sellnow TL, Rice RG, et al. Let me squeeze a word in: Exemplification effects, user comments and response to a news story. West J Commun. 2019;83(4):501–518.

139. Lin X, Kaufmann R, Spence PR, Lachlan KA. Agency cues in online comments: Exploring their relationship with anonymity and frequency of helpful posts. South Commun J. 2019;84(3):183–195.

140. Wu T-Y, Atkin DJ. To comment or not to comment: Examining the influences of anonymity and social support on one's willingness to express in online news discussions. New Media Soc. 2018;20(12):4512–4532.

141. Suh K-S, Lee S, Suh E-K, Lee H, Lee J. Online comment moderation policies for deliberative discussion – Seed comments and identifiability. J Assoc Inf Syst. 2018;19(3):182–208.

142. Suler J. The online disinhibition effect. Cyberpsychol Behav. 2004;7(3):321–326.

143. Myers West S. Censored, suspended, shadowbanned: User interpretations of content moderation on social media platforms. New Media Soc. 2018;20(11):4366–4383.

144. Stockinger A, Schäfer S, Lecheler S. Navigating the gray areas of content moderation: Professional moderators' perspectives on uncivil user comments and the role of (AI-based) technological tools. New Media Soc. 2023; online first.

145. Cohen J. A coefficient of agreement for nominal scales. Educ Psychol Meas. 1960;20(1):37–46.